the least molded depth measured from the top of keel, or the length from the fore-side of stem to the axis of rudder stock on that waterline, if that is greater.
In ships designed with a rake of keel the waterline on which this length is measured is taken parallel to the design waterline.
Molded dimensions are often referred to; these are taken to the inside of plating on a metal ship.
Base Line : A horizontal line drawn at the top of the keel plate.
Molded Beam : Measured at the midship section, this is the maximum molded breadth of the ship.
Molded Draft : Measured from the base line to the summer load line at the midship section.
Molded Depth : Measured from the base line to the heel of the upper deck beam at the ship’s side amidships.
Extreme Draft : Taken from the lowest point of keel to the summer load line.
Draft marks represent extreme drafts.
Extreme Depth : Depth of vessel at ship’s side from upper deck to lowest point of keel.
The vertical distance measured at the ship’s side between the summer load line (or service draft) and the freeboard deck.
Measured as the height of deck at side at any point above the height of deck at side amidships.
Measured as the height of deck at center above the height of deck at side.
Straight line camber is used on many large ships to simplify construction.
Rise of Floor (or Deadrise) : The rise of the bottom shell plating line above the base line.
This rise is measured at the line of molded beam.
Large cargo ships often have no rise of ﬂoor.
Tumblehome : The inward curvature of the side shell above the summer load line.
This is unusual on modern ships.
The outward curvature of the side shell above the waterline.
It promotes dryness and is therefore associated with the fore end of ship.
Stem Rake : Inclination of the stem line from the vertical.
Keel Rake : Inclination of the keel line from the horizontal.
Small craft occasionally have forward rake of keel to bring propellers above the line of keel.
Tween Deck Height : Vertical distance between adjacent decks measured from the tops of deck beams at ship’s side.
Either X-ray or gamma-ray devices may be used to provide the source of radiation.
Only a small percentage of this energy is converted to X-rays, so that large amounts of heat have to be conducted away from the target.
Weld Traverse Probe Reflected probe ULTRASONIC PROBE TRAVERSE OF BUTT WELD Probe traverse Timer Figure 10.6 Inspection of welds.
Tensile, bend, and impact tests are carried out on the deposited weld metal and welded plate specimens.
The slipways on which the ships are constructed piece by piece are supported by small and simple workshops.
All rights reserved.
The layout of a shipyard did not vary signiﬁcantly until the mid 1950s.
These had extensive outﬁtting workshops and quays, as well as larger slipways.
Large cranes, almost always ﬁxed in position, were available to lift heavy items, perhaps 200 tonnes for large, complex ships.
At that time a typical cargo ship was of below 10,000 deadweight tonnes, and a tanker of 20,000 deadweight tonnes was considered large.
By 1958, the ﬁrst tanker over 100,000 deadweight tones was in operation and the ﬁrst over 200,000 tonnes deadweight by 1966.
An important aspect of these newer ships was a tenfold increase in steelweight, from a typical 3000 tonnes to 30,000 tonnes.
Also, the largest ships were in excess of 300 meters in length.
The result was ﬁrst that existing shipyards reduced the number of slipways and increased the size of their cranes as the ship size increased.
This allowed them to construct the ships in a shorter time, so keeping the construction time acceptable.
A very few European shipyards increased the slipway sizes and cranes to be able to build VLCCs.
In many cases the shipyards are constrained as to the size and type of ship that can be built.
An ideal layout for a modern shipyard is based on a production ﬂow basis, as in Figure 11.2 , with the shipyard built on a greenﬁeld site and no longer, as with existing
shipyards, having to follow the river bank.
Figure 11.2 Modern, large shipyard layout.
Before considering the actual layout of the shipyard, it is as well to consider the relationship of the work processes involved in building a ship, as illustrated in Figure 11.3 .
An idealized layout of a new shipyard is indicated in Figure 11.4 , which might be appropriate for a smaller yard specializing in one or two standard type ships with a fairly high throughput so that one covered building dock or berth is sufﬁcient.
The greatest disadvantage of the building dock is its high initial cost.
This doubles the available time for outﬁtting the ship.
Chinese shipbuilders on the way to the top: The Naval Architect , September 2005.
Covered hall beneﬁt for Bijlsma: The Naval Architect , May 2002.
Run : The immersed body of the vessel aft of the parallel middle body.
Tonnage : This is often referred to when the size of the vessel is discussed, and the gross tonnage is quoted from Lloyd’s Register.
The principal dimensions of the ship are illustrated in Figure 2.1 .
VLCC (Very Large Crude Carrier) is a tanker usually between 200,000 tonnes and 300,000 tonnes deadweight.
Suezmax indicates the largest oil tanker that can transit the current Suez Canal fully laden, being about 150,000 tonnes deadweight.
Variously reported as being 80,000 to 115,000 tones deadweight.
Panamax is the maximum size of oil tanker, with beam restriction of 32.2 meters and length restriction of 275 meters, that can transit the Panama Canal prior to completion of the planned new locks.
Typical size is about 55,000–70,000 tonnes deadweight.
All bulk carriers above 80,000 tonnes deadweight fall into this category.
Most are up to 170,000 tonnes deadweight but a small number are larger for speciﬁc trade routes, the biggest being 365,000 tonnes deadweight.
Handymax ships are between around 35,000 and 60,000 tonnes deadweight.
Ships between 10,000 and 35,000 tonnes deadweight have formed the majority of the ﬂeet for many years and are designated ‘Handysize’.
In recent years the size of these ships has been increasing and the term ‘Handymax’ has been applied to designate the larger bulk carriers.
The site includes virtual shipyard tours explaining the process used.
www.shi.samsung.co.kr Take the virtual tour of the Geoje Shipyard.
Building large ships on a new site with building docks.
http://www.fsg-ship.de/198-1-latest-videos.html Shows construction of mainly ro-ro ships on a modernized, covered slipway.
Further reading 134 Some useful websites 134
All rights reserved.
Ship drawing of ﬁ ce
Two plans of particular signiﬁcance were the ship’s ‘lines plan’ and ‘shell expansion’.
The lines plan is a drawing, to a suitable scale, typically 1:100, of the molded lines of the vessel in plan, proﬁle, and section.
Usually, 10 equally spaced sections are selected with half ordinates at the ends where a greater change of shape occurs.
The lines of the lateral sections in the sheer plan as indicated are referred to as ‘bow lines’ forward and ‘buttock lines’ aft.
When the lines plan was completed manually the draughtsmen would compile a ‘table of offsets’, i.e. a list of half breadths, heights of decks and stringer, etc., at each of the drawn stations.
PLAN (waterlines) AFT
loftsmen for full-size or 10:1 scale fairing.
The offsets used for building the ship would subsequently be lifted by the loftsman from the full size or 10:1 scale lines for each frame.
Shipyards therefore made use of a ‘half block model’, which was in effect a scale model of half the ship’s hull from the center line outboard, mounted on a base board.
The model was either made up of solid wooden sections with faired wood battens to form the exterior, or of laminated planes of wood faired as a whole.
Finished with a white lacquer, the model was used to draw on the frame lines, plate seams and butts, lines of decks, stringers, girders, bulkheads, ﬂats, stem and stern rabbets, openings in shell, bossings, etc.
This technique illustrates both the side and bottom plating as a continuous whole.
In Figure 12.2 a typical shell expansion for a tanker is illustrated.
The mold loft in a shipyard was a large covered wooden ﬂoor area suitable for laying off ship details at full size.
When the loftsmen received the scale lines plan, and offsets from the drawing ofﬁce, the lines would be laid off on the mold loft ﬂoor full size and then faired.
Fairing was achieved by using wooden battens that were bent to follow the offsets,
Bottom A plating Keel plate FRAMING, STRINGERS, DECKS AND OPENINGS IN SIDE SHELL ARE ALSO SHOWN ON THE SHELL EXPANSION BUT HAVE BEEN OMITTED FOR CLARITY B5 B4 B3 C8 C7 C6 C5 C4 C3 C2 Figure 12.2 Shell expansion.
then held in place while the fair curve was inscribed on the wooden ﬂoor.
This would mean using a great area of ﬂoor, even though a contracted sheer and plan were normally drawn, and aft and forward body lines were laid over one another.
Body sections were laid out full size as they were faired to form what was known as a ‘scrieve board’.
10:1 scale lofting In the late 1950s the 10:1 lofting system was introduced and was eventually widely adopted.
Lines could be faired on a 10:1 scale and a 10:1 scale scrieve board created.
Many of the outlines of plates to be cut by the proﬁler could be traced directly from the scrieve board, for example ﬂoors and transverses.
The hull design was drawn by hand and stored on the computer as tables of offsets for use in the mold loft.
Early developments for steel plate cutting and even frame bending were also seen in a few shipyards in the 1960s.
Weld lengths and types, steel weights, and detailed parts lists can be processed from the information on the drawing and passed to the production control systems.
Figure 12.3 Ship product model.
For a numerically controlled proﬁling machine the piece parts to be cut can be ‘nested’, i.e. ﬁtted into the most economic plate, which can be handled by the machine with minimum wastage (see Figure 12.4 ).
The order in which parts are to be marked and cut can be deﬁned by drawing the tool head around the parts on the graphics screen.
When the burning instructions are complete the cutting sequence may be replayed and checked for errors.
Instructions for cutting ﬂame planed plates and subsequently joining them into panel assemblies and pin heights of jigs for setting up curved shell plates for welding framing and other members to them at the assembly stage can also be determined (see Figure 12.3 ).
This now includes all the hull structural information as well as outﬁtting.
There is, as close as possible, a complete representation of the whole ship.
Planing machines 140 Drilling machines 140 Guillotines 140 Presses 140 Plate rolls 141 Heat-line bending 142 Frame bending 143 Cold frame bending 144 Section pro ﬁ lers 144 Robotics 144
Further reading 146 Some useful websites 146
All rights reserved.
Also, the shipyard may not be located near a steelmaker and may choose to purchase steel from another country if prices are lower.
The stockyard ensures there is always steel to maintain production.
They may also standardize the steel plates used to reduce the need for marshaling.
Steel plates are now stacked horizontally in piles as required.
Lifts are made with magnetic clamps for plates and slings for the sections; the crane capacity can be up to 30 tonnes, to suit the material sizes that the shipyard can process.
A wash system will also remove debris, and in some cases snow or ice.
Plate leveling rolls (mangles)
This can cause distortion, which slows production.
Two sets of rolls may be provided, one for heavy plate and one for light plate, but types are now available that permit a wide range of thicknesses to be straightened.
Shot-blasting Plates and sections are in almost all cases now shot-blasted to remove rust and millscale.
The shot is recovered and recycled.
As it breaks down into smaller pieces, the mix of whole shot and fragments assists the blasting process.
Spent shot and debris is removed for disposal.
The whole process is enclosed.
Following the priming paint stage a drying process may be provided.
The drying also reduces the potential for damage to the primer coating.
Individual machines may have jib cranes mounted on the frame that can be employed to handle the plate during the machining process.
Plate and section part preparation A number of the methods in use for forming plates into the required shapes have been in use for many years.
In the main, cutting is achieved by the use of an oxy-fuel ﬂame or plasma arcs.
Plate pro ﬁ le cutting machines Where a plate is to be cut into one or more (or a series of) complicated shapes, a proﬁling machine is employed.
Provision can also be made for the shrinkage of the plate part as it cools after cutting.
The predicted shrinkage of the plate part is added to the nominal dimensions from the CAD system, so after cooling the part size is correct.
The overall arrangement is shown in Figure 13.1 .
In some cases, 1:1 template or drawing controlled systems may be used.
This can be for small, repetitive parts such as brackets.
Such parts are more usually programmed using a basic CAD system.
A full-size template or drawing may be used to control a cutting machine, and can be useful where a single small item is to be cut in large numbers.
Proﬁlers of this type have a limited application in shipbuilding, but can be
More basic cutting systems are likely to be found in very small shipyards and in ship repair.
This work may be carried out on a planing machine, usually a ﬂame or plasma-arc planer.
One beam carries two burning heads for trimming the plate sides during travel, whilst the other two beams have a single burning head traversing the beam in order to trim the plate ends.
Each burning head may be ﬁtted with triple nozzles and is used to give the required edge preparation.
Drilling machines Some plates or sections may need to have holes drilled in them, for example bolted covers and portable plates.
Drilling machines generally consist of a single drilling head mounted on a radial arm that traverses the drill bed.
This is done at less capital cost, but the press is slower when used for bending and requires greater skill.
Two lower rolls are provided and are made to revolve in the same direction so that the plate is fed between them and a slightly larger diameter top roll that runs idly (see Figure 13.3 ).
Either or both ends of the top roll may be adjusted for height, and the two lower rolls have adjustable centers.
With modern bending rolls, plates up to 45 mm thick may be handled and it is possible to roll plates into a half circle.
This may be done to obtain large mast and derrick post sections for example, or bow thruster tunnel.
Vertical rolls are also available and may be used to roll plates full circle, but can be much more useful for rolling heavy ﬂats used as facing bars on transverses of large tankers, etc. PLATE SWAGING EDGE CURVING PLATE FLANGING OR BENDING PLATE STRAIGHTENING Figure 13.2 Gap presses.
Apply heat Expansion Bend Contraction Single-plane bending Two-plane bending 1 2 4 3 Heat line bending principle Beam applying load PLATE ROLLS Top roller Driven roll Driven roll Plate Figure 13.3 Forming shell plates.
Heat is applied in a line to the surface of a plate by a ﬂame torch, with immediate cooling using air or water.
On cooling, contraction will take place in the direction of the plate surface, causing the plate to become concave on the side to which heat was applied (see Figure 13.3 ).
It is also used where a double curvature is required, for example on bulbous bow plates.
Frame bending The traditional system of bending side frames may still be in use for repair work, and is described as follows.
A ‘set-bar’, which is a ﬂat bar of soft iron, is bent to the scrieve line of the frame on the scrieve board and then taken to the frame bending slabs.
On these solid cast-iron slabs pierced with holes the line of the frame is marked, and modiﬁed to agree with the line of the toe of the frame.
As the heated frame on cooling will tend to bend, the set-bar is sprung to allow for this change in curvature before it is ﬁxed down on the bending slabs by means of ‘dogs’ and pins inserted in the slab holes.
Whilst the set-bar is being ﬁxed the frame section is heated in a long oil-ﬁred furnace adjacent to the bending slabs.
When at the right temperature it is pulled out onto the slabs and ﬁxed with dogs and pins against the set-bar, as quickly as possible.
Once bent, the bar is put aside to cool, but is fastened down to prevent its warping in the vertical direction.
When cold it is checked against the frame line drawn on the slabs.
Meanwhile, the set-bar is turned over and used to bend the corresponding frame for the opposite side of the ship.
Ships with a capacity of over 14,000 TEU.
Few have been built to date.
These ships are too large for any canals.
Their size is typically 5500–8000 TEU though larger ships with over 10,000 TEU capacity have been built.
Panamax ships that can transit the current Panama Canal carry between 3000 and 5000 TEU.
The smallest of these may only carry several hundred TEU.
There is no speciﬁc subclass below Panamax size.
These ships have been phased out under IMO regulations.
Category 3 includes oil tankers of 5000 tonnes deadweight and above but less than the tonnes deadweight speciﬁed for Categories 1 and 2.
Also due to be phased out.
Note: For tankers carrying HGO (heavy gas oil) the lower limits for Categories 2 and 3 fall to 600 tonnes deadweight.
Panama canal limits These are set by lock sizes.
New locks will be larger for ‘New Panamax’ ships (see Table 2.1 ).
Table 2.1 Panama Canal limits Panamax ships New Panamax ships Length (m) 294.13 366 Breadth (m) 32.81 49 Draft (m) 12.04 15.2
The frames are progressively bent by application of a horizontal ram whilst the frame is held by gripping levers ( Figure 13.4 ).
Any type of rolled section can be bent in some machines with a limitation on the size of section.
The inverse curve is marked onto the straight frame and the frame bent until the inverse curve becomes straight on the curved frame (see Figure 13.4 ).
Prior to cutting, the stiffening member can be moved through a marking cell where part identiﬁcation and, where required, bending lines for inverse curve frame bending (see Figure 13.4 ) can be marked.
Thus, the robot carries on working whilst new programs are produced for it.
Figure 13.4 Frame bending.
This is claimed to reduce preprogramming times to zero and no CAD models are required.
www.tts-marine.com See production systems.
Joining ship sections a ﬂ oat 158 Further reading 159 Some useful websites 159 Historically, ships were constructed on a slipway piece by piece.
During the Second World War a large number of merchant and war ships were required to be built in a short period of time.
During the 1950s there was an increase in ship size and the greater quantity of steel required for the structures of these ships was a major driver for the adoption of units.
All rights reserved.
What is termed ‘green’ material was left on the unit edges, typically around 20 mm.
The unit was then lifted into place and cut to ﬁt the structure, which had already been erected.
This provides a saving in man-hours and time.
Figure 14.1 shows a typical side block for a single hull bulk carrier.
When the ﬁrst large tankers were built, typical units were around 50 tonnes.
As the ships grew in size they also grew in complexity and outﬁtting began to be a bottleneck.
The traditional approach of completing and launching the hull prior to outﬁtting in a basin or at a quay had to be modiﬁed.
Figure 14.2 shows a pipe module which could be ﬁtted onto a steel block, or lifted directly into the ship during construction.
There Wing tank/ deck unit Side shell panel assembly Hopper side unit Part transverse bulkhead panel Figure 14.1 Bulk carrier single shell side block unit.
Floor plate level Tank top level Figure 14.2 Pipe module.
Block : An assembly of two or more units into a bottom or side block, weighing up to 200 tonnes.
Subassemblies When plates and sections have been machined (cut, bent, beveled, etc.)
Minor subassemblies such as deep frames consisting of web and welded face ﬂat are also attached at this stage.
Curved shell plates are placed on jigs and welded, and the various stiffening members can be aligned and welded in a similar manner to those on a ﬂat panel assembly.
Panel assemblies used in the block may
well have dimensions restricted by the plate length that can be handled at the machining stage and this can subsequently inﬂuence block length.
Each unit should be designed for maximum downhand welding but may have to be turned for this purpose.
Also, outﬁt modules can be installed into the blocks.
Figure 14.3 Assembly unit outﬁtted on both sides.
Suez canal limits There are no locks and ship size is limited by the canal dimensions.
With no locks the ship length is also unrestricted.
The maximum draft is 20 meters.
The Saint Lawrence Seaway links the North American Great Lakes to the Atlantic.
The limits for ships based on the locks are length 226 m, breadth 24 m, and draft 7.92 m. Some useful websites www.pancanal.com/eng/general
Unit erection When any panel and the block assemblies are complete there will be some time buffer before their erection at the building berth, building dock, or within the building hall to Figure 14.4 Cabin/toilet module.
For an established medium-sized yard with building berth or hall having modest craneage, typical erection sequences for a general cargo ship, a large double-hull oil tanker, and bulk carrier are shown in Figures 14.5, 14.6, and 14.7 respectively.
The block assemblies for the bulk carrier are shown in Figure 14.8 .
Double bottom port 7.
Tween deck sides 2.
Double bottom stbd.
Tween deck center 3.
Transverse bulkhead 9.
Main deck sides 4 & 5.
Side shell 10.
Main deck center 6.
Bilge plates 11.
Main deck hatch Figure 14.5
Bilge unit 4.
Double-hull side unit 6.
Deck/side unit 7.
Center deck unit 8.
Deck units Figure 14.6 An erection sequence for a large double-hull tanker.
Lower bulkhead unit 3.
Upper bulkhead panel 4 & 5.
Side block incorporating shell, tanks and part bulkhead 6.
Deck between hatches 7.
Hatch coaming Figure 14.7 An erection sequence for a dry cargo bulk carrier.
No. 3 hatch No. 2 hatch
longitudinals, stiffeners, etc. may be left unwelded across unit seams and butts until these are completed in a similar manner to that described in Chapter 10.
A number of large shipbuilding ﬁrms building the super tankers, large chemical carriers, bulk carriers, etc. may assemble much larger ‘mega-blocks’ that can be the full width of the ship.
These are transported to the building berth or a building dock, lifted into place and joined.
This is not a very efﬁcient process and is adopted as an expedient only.
One method adopted is that where a cofferdam is arranged in way of the joint, a caisson is brought up against the ship’s hull, and the cofferdam and caisson are pumped dry.
Once the spaces are dried out, welding of the complete joint may be undertaken, the resulting weld being X-rayed to test the soundness of such a critical joint.
On completion of the paint scheme in way of the joint the caisson is removed.
A similar method makes use of a rubber ‘U’ form ring rather than a caisson, which needs modiﬁcation for each ship size.
If a dry dock is available the sections may be aligned aﬂoat and even welded above the waterline, the rest of the joint or the complete joint being secured by strongbacks.
Surveyor , Fall 2005 edition.
The site includes a ‘virtual tour’ of the shipyard.
Further reading 172 Some useful websites 172
This chapter identiﬁes the various means of transferring a ship from the land on which it is constructed to the water.
End launching is now less common as most newer shipyards have a building dock.
Other methods are less common and include side launching, a ship lift, a ﬂoating dock, or a pontoon.
There is also a danger of damage to propellers and rudders as the ship leaves the end of the slipway.
All rights reserved.
End launches On release of a holding mechanism the launching cradle with the ship slides down the ground ways under the action of gravity.
When the stern has entered the water the vessel is partly supported by buoyancy and partly by the ground ways.
As the vessel travels further into the water the buoyancy becomes sufﬁcient to lift the stern.
The vessel then pivots about the forward poppets, i.e. the fore end of the launching cradle.
During building the keel blocks take the greater part of the weight, the remainder being carried by shores and, where used, bilge blocks.
Keel blocks are arranged so that the height of keel above the ground is 1.25– 1.5 m, giving reasonable access, but not too high so that a large amount of packing is required (see Figure 15.1 ).
At the bow the height of the keel must be sufﬁcient to allow the ship’s forefoot to dip the required amount without striking the ground during pivoting when the stern lifts at launch.
To transfer the ship from the building blocks to the launching cradle, the commonest practice is to drive wedges into the launching cradle.
This lifts the ship and permits the removal of the keel and bilge blocks together with the shores.
One type is the sand box, which contains sand to a depth of 80–100 mm held in a steel frame located between two of the wooden blocks.
This steel frame may be removed and the sand allowed to run out.
Another type is a wooden block sawn diagonally, the two halves being bolted so that they collapse on removal of the bolts.
REINFORCED BERTH Bilge blocks Shore Space for launching ways Keel blocks Shore Concrete Space for launching ways Bilge blocks Figure 15.1 Building blocks.
Launching ways and cradle The ﬁxed ground ways or standing ways on which the cradle and ship slide may be straight or have a fore and aft camber.
Transversely the ground ways are normally laid straight but can be canted inwards to suit the ship’s rise of ﬂoor.
Usually, the ground ways have a small uniform fore and aft camber, say 1 in 400, the ways being the arc of a circle of large radius.
As a result a greater buoyancy for the same travel of the ship beyond the way ends is obtained, which will reduce the way end pressures.
Generally two ground ways are ﬁtted, the distance between the ways being about one-third the beam of the ship.
Some large ships have been launched on as many as four ways, and in Germany and the Netherlands it is common practice to launch vessels on a single center-line ground way.
The width of the ways should be such that the launching weight of the ship does not produce pressures exceeding about 20 tonnes per square meter.
Ground ways are laid on supporting blocks and extend down to the low water mark so that they are covered by at least 1 meter of water at high tide.
To guide the sliding ways as they move over the ground ways, a ribband may be ﬁtted to the outer edge of the ground ways.
This could be ﬁtted to the inner edge of the sliding ways, but when ﬁtted to the ground ways has the advantage that it aids retention of the lubricating grease.
It is therefore designed to carry a load of this magnitude, but there is a danger in the ﬁne-lined vessel of the forward poppets being forced outwards by the downward force, i.e. the bow might break through the poppets.
In addition, saddle plates taken under the forefoot of the ship with packing between them and the shell may be ﬁtted to transmit the load to the fore poppets and hence ground ways.
Here short plate brackets may be
3 Development of ship types Chapter Outline Dry cargo ships 17 Container ships 21 Barge-carrying ships 21 Ro-ro ships 21 Hull form 23 Cargo handling equipment 23 Bulk carriers 23 Car carriers 26 Oil tankers 26 Passenger ships 30 Further reading 33 A breakdown into broad working groups of the various types that the shipbuilder or ship designer might be concerned with are shown in Figure 3.1 .
Dry cargo ships If the development of the dry cargo ship from the time of introduction of steam propulsion is considered, the pattern of change is similar to that shown in Figure 3.2 .
A number of designs at that time also combined bridge and poop, and a few combined bridge and forecastle, so that a single well was formed.
Raised quarter decks were often associated with smaller deadweight carrying vessels, e.g. colliers.
All rights reserved.
temporarily welded between the shell plating and heavy plate wedge rider, as illustrated in Figure 15.2 .
To do this the slope of the ways under the vessel’s center of gravity must exceed the lubricant’s coefﬁcient of friction.
Formerly, melted tallow was applied to the ways, allowed to harden, and then covered with a coat of soft soap.
To prevent the petroleum-based grease from soaking into the sliding ways, a base coat may be applied to them.
Standing ways that extend into the water may be dried out at low tide prior to the launch and the base coat and grease applied.
Releasing arrangements Small ships may be released by knocking away a diagonal dog-shore (see Figure 15.3 ) ﬁtted between the sliding and standing ways.
In most cases, however, triggers are used to release the ship.
The hydraulic trigger is less easily installed and less safe.
A number of triggers will be ﬁtted depending on the size of the vessel to be launched; in the case of the 75,000-tonne bulk carrier for which a launching sequence is given below, six triggers were ﬁtted for the launch.
These triggers are in effect a simple system of levers that allow the large loads acting down the ways to be balanced by a small load on the releasing gear.
FORE POPPET FOR SHIP WITH FULL FORWARD SECTIONS Plate bracket Plate ribband Ramming up wedges Make up Ground way Sliding way BRACKET IN WAY OF FRAMING Plate ribband Packing Sliding way Ground way Make up Ground way Sliding way Ribband Wedge Ribband Ribband Wood truss Bracket FORE POPPET FOR SHIP WITH FINE LINES FORWARD Figure 15.2 Launching ways—fore poppet.
Sliding way Ground way 2nd lever Solenoid release unit Slip shackle 1st lever 3rd lever Load Anvil Figure 15.3 Release arrangements for ship launch.
Launching sequence As a guide to the procedure leading up to the launch, the following example is given for the launch of a 75,000-tonne bulk carrier.
The launch ways have been built up as the ship is erected from aft; the ways have been greased and the cradle erected.
Four days before launch a start is made on ramming up the launch blocks, i.e. driving in the wedges ( Figure 15.2 ) to raise ship off the building blocks.
This is done by a dozen or so men using a long ramming pole, a gang working either side of the ship.
Two days before the launch a start is made on removing the shores.
On the morning of the launch everything is removed up to the high water mark and tumbler shores are put in aft.
These are inclined shores that fall away as the ship starts to move.
Every second keel block is then removed and the vessel is allowed to settle.
An evenly distributed number of keel blocks are then taken out so that only about 20 keel blocks are left supporting the ship.
Half an hour before the launch the last remaining keel blocks are removed.
The bilge blocks are then removed.
The full ship’s weight comes on the triggers at the time planned for the launch.
There are a number of methods available for doing this, one or more being employed at most ship launches.
Each chain drag is laid in the form of a horseshoe with its rounded portion away from the water, so that as the ship moves down the ways the forward portion of the drag is pulled through the remainder of the pile.
This prevents any excessive shock load in the chain, which would occur if the pile of chain were to be suddenly accelerated to the speed of the ship.
The wire rope drag lines are attached to temporary pads on the side of the ship, and supported by rope tricing lines as they are led slightly forward and then aft along the ship’s sides.
Each drag line is then led forward and shackled to the chain drag (see Figure 15.4 ).
As the ship is released and moves aft the tricing lines are broken in turn, the work done absorbing some of the ship’s energy.
To further increase the resistance to motion of the ship, wooden masks may be ﬁtted at the stern of the ship.
The mask is made as large as possible but located low down to present a ﬂat surface to the water in the direction of motion.
Masks are often
Welded pads Tricing lines Wire lines Cradle ELEVATION MASKS SECTION AFT LOOKING FOR’D Mask of wooden slats Way end PLAN Chain drags SLEWING ARRANGEMENTS Wire Figure 15.4 Arresting arrangements at launch.
constructed of horizontal pieces of wood with spaces left between each piece to increase the resistance.
Chain drags, weights, or anchors may be placed in the water to one side of the building berth for this purpose.
These are then made fast to the stern of the ship with drag lines of a predetermined length.
Side launching is usually restricted to small ships, typically no more that around 100 meters in length.
The ground ways are arranged transversely, i.e. at right angles to the line of keel.
Packing again forms the cradle with tie pieces between the groups of sliding ways.
One of the features of side launching is the drop where the ground ways are not extended into the water; consequently, large angles of heel occur when the vessel strikes the water.
In a building dock it is also possible to construct two ships at the same time.
The ﬁrst ship can then be ﬂoated out of the dock while the second remains in the dry.
Once the dock is dewatered the second ship can be moved to the seaward end and a third ship started.
In some shipyards conventional berths are ﬁtted at the river or sea end with what is virtually a pair of dock gates.
In many instances it also permits higher tides over the way ends when the gates are opened for a launch.
The ship can be built with the gate closed, maintaining a dry working environment.
When the gate is opened the lower part of the slipway ﬂoods and provides sufﬁcient water depth for the launch to be carried out successfully.
Rail systems are incorporated into the building hall and lead out to the open ship lift.
Ship lifts basically consist of a series of transverse beams, each supported by wires or chains suspended from a winch on each side.
A platform is also supported by the beams to provide access when the ship is lifted clear of the water.
The lift can also be used to recover a ship from the water for repair.
Originally, ship lifts were used for ﬂeets of small ships, for example in ﬁshing ports, but have increased in size for large commercial repairs and some construction.
The largest lift is able to lift over 20,000 tonnes.
The arrangement is similar to a ship lift, with rails to allow the completed ship to be transferred onto the dock.
Marine railways A few small shipyards use a slipway with a set or rails that extend into the water.
As with the ship lift, a marine railway can also be used to recover ships for repair.
Further reading Dunn, Kennedy, and Tibbs, Launching in the 21st century.
Some useful websites http://www.royalhaskoning.co.uk The company is a designer of dry docks worldwide.
http://www.fsg-ship.de/ The Flensberg shipyard site, includes webcams and video.
Today, only small vessels such as tugs, ferries, and cargo ships of less than 500 gross tonnage have a single-bottom construction.
Larger ocean-going vessels are ﬁtted with some form of double bottom.
Keels At the center line of the bottom structure is located the keel, which is often said to form the backbone of the ship.
The commonest form of keel is that known as the ‘ﬂat plate’ keel, and this is ﬁtted in the majority of ocean-going and other vessels (see Figure 16.1 a).
A form of keel found on smaller vessels is the bar keel ( Figure 16.1 b).
The bar keel may be ﬁtted in trawlers, tugs, etc. and is also found in smaller ferries.
All rights reserved.
Ships Middle strake of tank top (a) FLAT PLATE KEEL Flat keel plate Continuous center girder (b) BAR KEEL Garboard strake of bottom shell Bar keel Drain hole Solid floor Flange Ships (c) DUCT KEEL Solid floor Ships Stiffener Side girder Piping Stiffener Solid floor Figure 16.1 Keels.
Trawlers purse seiners etc.
Cross-channel ferries Coastal ferries Harbor ferries Figure 3.1 Ship types.
Duct keels ( Figure 16.1 c) are provided in the double bottoms of some vessels.
The piping is then accessible when cargo is loaded, an entrance to the duct being provided at the forward end of the engine room.
No duct is required aft of the engine room as the piping may be carried in the shaft tunnel.
Awidth of not more than 2.0 m is allowed for the duct, and strengthening is provided at the tank top and keel plate to maintain continuity of strength of the transverse ﬂoors.
A center-line girder is ﬁtted and one side girder is ﬁtted each side of the center line where the beam is less than 10 m. Where the beam is between 10 and 17 m, two side girders are ﬁtted and if any bottom shell panel has a width-to-length ratio greater than 4 additional continuous or intercostal stiffeners are ﬁtted.
It may be deeper to give the required capacities of oil fuel, fresh water, and water ballast to be carried in the bottom.
Garboard strake Bar keel Figure 16.2 Single-bottom construction.
It is not uncommon, however, for it to be extended to the ship’s side, and individual bilge wells are then provided for drainage purposes (see Chapter 26).
It may therefore be heavier than the other strakes of inner bottom plating.
If grabs are used for discharging from general cargo ships the plate thickness is further increased, or a double ceiling is ﬁtted.
At the ends of bottom tank spaces and under the main bulkheads, watertight or oiltight plate ﬂoors are provided.
These are made watertight or oiltight by closing any holes in the plate ﬂoor and welding collars around any members that pass through the ﬂoors.
Also, small air and drain holes may be drilled at the top and bottom respectively of the solid plate ﬂoors in the tank spaces.
The spacing of the solid plate ﬂoors varies according to the loads supported and local stresses experienced.
At intermediate frame spaces between the solid plate ﬂoors, ‘bracket ﬂoors’ are ﬁtted.
The bracket ﬂoor consists simply of short transverse plate brackets ﬁtted in way of the center girder and tank sides (see Figures 16.4 and 16.5 ).
Transversely framed double bottom If the double bottom is transversely framed, then transverse solid plate ﬂoors, and bracket ﬂoors with transverse frames, provide the principal support for the inner bottom and bottom shell plating ( Figure 16.4 ).
Solid plate ﬂoors are ﬁtted at every frame space in the engine room and in the pounding region (see the end of this chapter).
Where a ship is regularly discharged by grabs, solid plate ﬂoors are also ﬁtted at each frame.
Elsewhere, the solid plate ﬂoors may be spaced up to 3.0 m apart, with bracket ﬂoors at frame spaces between the solid ﬂoors.
The plate brackets of bracket ﬂoors are ﬂanged and their breadth is at least 75% of the depth of the center girder at the bracket ﬂoors.
To reduce the span of the frames, which should not exceed 2.5 meters, at the bracket ﬂoor, vertical angle or channel bar struts may be ﬁtted.
One intercostal side girder is provided port and starboard where the ship’s breadth exceeds 10 m but does not exceed 20 m, and two are ﬁtted port and starboard where the ship’s breadth is greater.
In way of the bracket ﬂoors a vertical welded ﬂat stiffener is attached to the side girder.
They are also ﬁtted under boiler seats, transverse bulkheads, and the toes of stiffener brackets on deep tank bulkheads.
At intermediate frame spaces brackets are ﬁtted at the tank side and at the center girder, where they may be up to 1.25 m apart.
One intercostal side girder is ﬁtted port and starboard if the ship’s breadth exceeds 14 m, and where the breadth exceeds 21 m two are ﬁtted port and starboard.
These side girders always extend as far forward and aft as possible.
Where the double bottom is transversely framed, solid plate ﬂoors are ﬁtted at every frame space in the pounding region.
Where the minimum designed draft forward may be more than 4% but less than 4.5% of the ship’s length, solid plate ﬂoors may be ﬁtted at every third frame space and intercostal side girders may have a maximum spacing of four times the transverse ﬂoor spacing.
Greater slamming forces (i.e. pounding) are experienced when the ship is in the lighter ballast condition, and is long and slender, by reason of the increased submersion of the bow in heavy weather with impact also on the bow ﬂare.
A closer spacing of solid plate ﬂoors is required, the maximum spacing being 2.5 m, and also additional intercostal side girders are provided, the spacing not exceeding 3.7 m (see Figure 16.6 ).
Testing double-bottom compartments Each compartment is tested on completion with a head of water representing the maximum pressure head that may be experienced in service, i.e. to the top of the air pipe.
The air pressure may be raised to 0.21 kg/cm 2 and then lowered to a test pressure of 0.14 kg/cm 2 .
Any suspect joints are then subjected to a soapy liquid solution test.
By ﬁtting a raised quarter deck in way of the after holds this tendency was eliminated.
A raised quarter deck does not have the full height of a tween deck, above the upper deck.
3 2 1 Machinery RAISED QUARTER DECK Raised quarter deck Machinery 4 3 2 1 Deep tank 4 Shaft Tunnel 3 2 1 Machinery AWNING OR SPAR DECK Awning deck Machinery 4 3 5 2 1 Deep tank ALL AFT CARGO SHIP 4 Shaft Tunnel 3 2 1 Machinery Tonnage hatch Tonnage openings OPEN SHELTER DECK THREE ISLAND TYPE 4 Shaft Tunnel 3 2 1 Machinery 4 Shaft Tunnel 3 2 1 Machinery COMBINED POOP AND BRIDGE Figure 3.2 Development of cargo ship.
To this end, resilient mounting and ﬂexible couplings are now common in such ships.
17 Shell plating and framing Chapter Outline Shell plating 189 Bottom shell plating 189 Side shell plating 190 Grades of steel for shell plates 191
Some useful websites 205
Shell plating The bottom and side shell plating consists of a series of ﬂat and curved steel plates generally of greater length than breadth butt welded together.
The vertical welded joints are referred to as ‘butts’ and the horizontal welded joints as ‘seams’ (see Figure 17.1 ).
Framing is notched in way of welded plate butts and seams.
Bottom shell plating Throughout the length of the ship the width and thickness of the keel plate remain constant where a ﬂat plate keel is ﬁtted.
Its thickness is never less than that of the adjoining bottom plating.
Strakes of bottom plating to the bilges have their greatest thickness over the 40% of the ship’s length amidships, where the bending stresses are highest.
All rights reserved.
There is also a thickness increase at the stern frame connection, at any shaft brackets, and in way of the hawse pipes, where considerable chaﬁng occurs.
Further shell plate thickness increases may be found at the panting region, as discussed later in this chapter.
The upper strake of plating adjacent to the strength deck is referred to as the ‘sheerstrake’.
As the sheerstrake is at a large distance from the neutral axis it has a greater thickness than the other strakes of side shell plating.
The upper edge is dressed smooth, and the welding of bulwarks to the edge of the sheerstrake is not permitted within the amidships length of the ship.
The connection between the sheerstrake and strength deck can present a problem, and a rounded gunwale may be adopted to solve this problem where the plating is heavy.
This is often the case over the midship portion of large tankers and bulk carriers.
The radius of a rounded gunwale must be adequate (not less than 15 times the thickness) and any welded guardrails and fairleads are kept off the radiused plate if possible.
25mm Rad notch cut in frame in way of seam Welded seam One frame space Frame Welded butt Welded butt Figure 17.1 Shell plating.
All openings in the side shell have rounded corners, and openings for sea inlets etc. are kept clear of the bilge radius if possible.
Grades of steel for shell plates In large ships it is necessary to arrange strakes of steel with greater notch ductility at the more highly stressed regions.
Details of Lloyd’s requirements for mild steel and over 40% of the length amidships are given in Table 17.1 as a guide.
The rules also require thicker plating for the members referred to in Table 17.1 outside the amidships region to have greater notch ductility.
Smaller single-skin bulk carriers Table 17.1 Lloyd’s requirements for mild steel Requirement Structural member 1.
Grade D where thickness is less than 15 mm, otherwise Grade E. Sheerstrake or rounded gunwale over 40% of length amidships in ships exceeding 250 m in length.
Grade A where thickness is less than 15 mm.
Grade B where thickness is 15–20 mm.
Grade D where thickness is 20–25 mm.
Grade E where thickness is greater than 25 mm. Sheerstrake and rounded gunwale over 40% of length amidships in ships of 250 m or less in length.
Bilge strake (other than for vessels of less than 150 m with double bottom over full breadth).
Grade A where thickness is less than 20 mm.
Grade B where thickness is 20–25 mm.
Grade D where thickness is 25–40 mm.
Grade E where thickness is over 40 mm.
Bilge strake (ships of less than 150 m and with double bottom over full breadth).
Grade A where thickness is less than 30 mm.
Grade B where thickness is 30–40 mm.
Grade D where thickness is greater than 40 mm.
then have transverse frames at the side shell ﬁtted between the hopper and topside tank (see Figure 17.7 ).
Transverse framing In a general cargo ship the transverse framing will consist of main and hold frames with brackets top and bottom, and lighter tween deck frames with brackets at the tops only (see Figure 17.2 ).
A typical midship section for a general cargo ship is shown in Figure 17.6 .
Deck beam Tween frame Deck beam Hold frame Web frame Tank side bracket Beam knee Figure 17.2 Side shell with transverse framing.
In way of tanks such as oil bunkers or cargo deep tanks the side frame size will be increased, except where supporting side stringers are ﬁtted within the tank space.
Web frames, i.e. built-up frames consisting of plate web and face ﬂat, where the web is considerably deeper than the conventional transverse frame, are often introduced along the side shell (see Figure 17.3 a).
In the tween decks above the after peak tank, web frames are required at every fourth frame space abaft the aft peak bulkhead.
In all cases the provision of web frames is intended to increase the rigidity of the transverse ship section at that point.
Transverse webs are ﬁtted to support the side longitudinals, these being spaced not more than 3.8 m apart, in ships of 100 m length or less, with increasing spacing being permitted for longer ships.
In the peaks the spacing is 2.5 m where the length of ship is less than 100 m, increasing linearly to a spacing of 3.5 m where the length exceeds 300 m. Larger ships required to have a double hull are longitudinally framed at the sides with transverse webs arranged in line with the ﬂoors in the double bottom to ensure continuity of transverse strength.
Horizontal perforated ﬂats are ﬁtted between the inner and outer side plating to support the transverse webs (see Figures 17.8 and 17.9 ).
A roll on roll off (ro-ro) ship midship section is shown in Figure 17.10 .
Avery different ship type is shown in Figure 17.11 , that is a catamaran fast ferry.
Tank side brackets The lower end of the frame may be connected to the tank top or hopper side tank by means of a ﬂanged or edge-stiffened tank side bracket, as illustrated in Figure 17.3 b.
Stiffener Solid floor Solid floor Solid floor Tank side bracket Stiffener Lightening hole Hold frame Tank top Hold frame (b) TANK SIDE BRACKETS OR CONNECTIONS Tank top Flat stiffener 200mm flat facing bar (a) WEB FRAME 750 mm Deck transverse Tween frame Tween deck Deck longitudinals Web plate Solid floor Tank side bracket Margin plate Hold frame Flange Flange Figure 17.3 Web frame and tank side bracket.
Local strengthening of shell plating The major region in which the shell plating is subjected to local forces at sea is at the forward end.
Strengthening of the forward bottom shell for pounding forces is dealt with in Chapter 16.
These ‘panting beams’ are connected to the frames by brackets and if long may be supported at the ship’s center line by a partial wash bulkhead.
Intermediate frames are bracketed to the stringer (see Figure 17.4 ).
Side stringers spaced vertically about 2 m apart and supported by web frames.
Perforated ﬂats spaced not more than 2.5 m apart.
These stringers may be omitted if the shell plating thickness is increased by 15% for vessels of 150 m length or less, decreasing linearly to a 5% increase for vessels of 215 m length or more.
Stringers usually take the form of a web plate with ﬂat facing bar.
In tween deck spaces in the forward 15% of the ship’s length, intermediate panting stringers are ﬁtted where the unsupported length of tween frame exceeds 2.6 m in lower tween decks or 3 m in upper tween decks.
In the aft peak space and in deep tween decks above the aft peak similar panting arrangements are required for transverse framing, except that the vertical spacing of panting stringers may be up to 2.5 m apart.
A main ice belt zone is deﬁned that extends above the ice load waterline (i.e. normally the summer load waterline) and below the ice light waterline (i.e. lightest waterline ship navigates ice in).
The extent of this zone depends on the ice class assigned.
For the more severe ice conditions the thickness of the side shell is also increased below the main ice belt zone for at least 40% of the length from forward.
Transverse main and intermediate frames of heavier scantlings are ﬁtted in way of the main ice belt zone.
Bilge keel Most ships are ﬁtted with some form of bilge keel, the prime function of which is to help damp the rolling motion of the vessel.
Cracks have originated in the bilge keel and propagated into the bilge plate causing failure of the main structure.
At a later date, what were known as open/closed shelter deck ships were developed.
A vessel having a ‘modiﬁed tonnage’ had tonnage measured to the second deck only, i.e. the tween deck was exempt, but the tonnage mark was not to be submerged.
When the tonnage mark was submerged, tonnage was taken as that to the upper deck, the freeboard being a minimum measured from the upper deck.
That is, there are say three or four holds forward and one aft of the machinery space.
a continuous ground bar with the butt welds in the shell plating, ground bar, and bilge keel staggered (see Figure 17.5 ).
Direct connection between the ground bar butt welds and the bilge plate and bilge keel butt welds and the ground bar are avoided.
In ships over 65 m in length, holes are drilled in the bilge keel butt welds as shown in Figure 17.5 .
Connection of the ground bar to the shell is by continuous ﬁllet welds and the bilge keel is connected to the ground bar by light continuous or staggered intermittent weld.
The latter lighter weld ensures that should the bilge keel be fouled, failure occurs at this joint without the bilge plate being damaged.
Bilge keels are gradually tapered (at least 3 to 1) at their ends and ﬁnish in way of an internal stiffening member.
Bilge keel ending Shell butt 25 mm dia hole Bilge keel butt Ground bar butt Frame Molded line of bottom shell Bilge plate Molded line of side shell Figure 17.5 Bilge keels.
Ceiling Keel plate 1800 mm
Deck plating (21.25 mm) Tank side bracket Inner bottom longitudinals 200 mm
× 10.5 mm O.B.P. Bottom longitudinals 200 mm × 13.75 mm O.B.P. Bilge ceiling Middle line strake 12.75 mm Corrugated bulkhead Side plating (16.5 mm) Side frame 340 mm × 17.25 mm O.B.P. Length B.P. 132.5 m Beam mid. 18.42 m Depth mid. 11.75
m Deck transverse 300 mm deep with 237.5 mm flange Tween deck plating (9.5 mm) Corrugated bulkhead Deck transverse 300 mm deep with 200 mm flange Knee Ship’s Upper deck longitudinals (150 mm ×  75 mm × 15 mm) Sheerstrake (210 mm × 20 mm) grade ‘E’ Tripping bracket Stringer plate (20 mm)
10mm Knee Cargo battens Figure 17.6
Figure 17.7 Bulk carrier—single-side skin midship section.
Pipe duct c L Tank top Stringer 1 Stringer 2 Stringer 3 Upper deck Pipe duct Transverse frames 280 × 11 OBP spaced 800 mm Web frames – spacing 2400 mm below stringer 1 4800 mm above stringer 1 Solid floors at 1200 mm spacing Length overall 180 m Breadth molded 30 m Draft molded 9.75 m
Deadweight 34,000 tonnes Hatch 1700 mm Figure 17.8 Bulk carrier—double-side skin midship section.
DECK TH SIDE SHELL 10.5
D 2 ND .
Depth mid. 12.81 m VEHICLE DECK TRAIN DECK
mm L Figure 17.10 Midship section of ro-ro ship.
Bridging structure Length O.A. 44.0 M Beam O.A. 12.0 M Material—Aluminum Alloy Tunnel plating Bottom plating Waterline Main deck Side plating Fender extrusion Transverse Deck beam Floor Figure 17.11 High speed craft (catamaran)—section.
Some useful websites www.iacs.org.uk Copies of the IACS’s Common Structural Rules for Bulk Carriers are available on this website.
This chapter deals with the internal vertical structure of the ship.
All rights reserved.
As a rule the strength of the transverse watertight bulkheads is maintained to the strength deck, which may be above the freeboard deck.
Neither should it be too far aft so that the compartment ﬂooded forward causes excessive trim by the bow.
Classiﬁcation societies require the location for ships whose length does not exceed 200 m as not less than 5% and not greater than 8% of the ship’s length (Lloyd’s length) from the fore end of the load waterline.
A minimum distance of 10 meters may also be speciﬁed to ensure that the bulkhead is effective.
As a rule this bulkhead is ﬁtted at the minimum distance in order to gain the maximum length for cargo stowage.
It is located well aft so that the peak when ﬂooded would not cause excessive trim by the stern.
Table 18.1 indicates the number of watertight bulkheads recommended by Lloyd’s Register for any cargo ship.
In container ships the spacing is arranged to suit the standard length of containers carried.
The narrow deck width outboard of the hatch opening forms the crown of a double shell space containing wing ballast tanks and passageways (see Figure 17.9).
These may have hatch covers on the forward holds only, or none at all, and are provided with substantial stripping pumps for removing rain and green water from the holds.
The largest ships are those operated by Maersk, which can carry a reported 13,500 TEU.
These are unusual and most large ships are between with one classiﬁcation society reporting more than 60 vessels of at least 8000 TEU classed (see Figure 3.3 b).
Other designs make provision for ﬂoating the barges in and out of the carrying ship, which can be ballasted to accommodate them.
Ro-ro ships These ships are characterized by the stern and in some cases the bow or side doors giving access to a vehicle deck above the waterline but below the upper deck (see Figure 3.3 a).
Access within the ship may be provided in the form of ramps or lifts leading from this vehicle deck to upper decks or hold below.
Cargo is carried in vehicles and trailers or in unitized form loaded by fork-lift and other trucks.
In order to permit the drive-through vehicle deck
Smaller bulkheads may be erected as a single unit; larger bulkheads are in two or more units.
always been the practice to use horizontal strakes of plating since the plate thickness increases with depth below the top of the bulkhead.
The reason for this is that the plate thickness is directly related to the pressure exerted by the head of water when a compartment on one side of the bulkhead is ﬂooded.
At the lower end of transverse hold bulkheads in bulk carriers a bulkhead stool is generally ﬁtted (see Figure 18.3 ) at the lower end of the bulkhead.
The boundaries of the bulkhead are double continuously ﬁllet welded directly to the shell, decks, and tank top.
At the line of the tween decks a ‘shelf plate’ is ﬁtted to the bulkhead and when erected the tween decks land on this plate, which extends 300–400 mm from the bulkhead.
The deck is lap welded to the shelf plate with an overlap of about 25 mm.
In the case of a corrugated bulkhead it becomes necessary to ﬁt ﬁlling pieces between the troughs in way of the shelf plate.
Watertight floor Upper deck Tween deck Welded seam Welded seam Welded seam Welded seam
Figure 18.1 Plain watertight bulkhead.
All bulkheads, unless they form the boundaries of a tank that is regularly subject to a head of liquid, are hose tested.
Where a doorway is cut in the lower part of a watertight bulkhead care must be taken to maintain the strength of the bulkhead.
The opening is to be framed and reinforced if the vertical stiffeners are cut in way of the opening.
The actual opening is kept as small as possible, the access to the shaft tunnel being about 1000–1250 mm high and about 700 mm wide.
A swinging hinged type of door could prove impossible to close in the event of ﬂooding and is not permitted.
Vertical sliding doors may be closed by a vertical screw thread, which is turned by a shaft extending above the bulkhead and ﬁtted with a crank handle.
This screw thread turns in a gunmetal nut attached to the top of the door, and a crank handle is also provided at the door to allow it to be closed from this position.
The horizontal sliding door may also be opened and closed by a hydraulic ram with a hydraulic hand pump and with control at the door and above the bulkhead deck (see Figure 18.4 ).
When in place all watertight doors are given a hose test, but those in a passenger ship are required to be tested under a head of water extending to the bulkhead deck.
These may be similar to the weathertight doors ﬁtted in superstructures, but are to have gunmetal pins in the hinges.
However, in modern cargo ships they may need to be
Door control valve Door opening Door Hand pump operated from both sides of door Hydraulic cylinder Figure 18.4 Watertight doors.
They must be bracketed or welded to some other form of stiffening member at their ends.
This is to reduce the free surface effect.
This tunnel carries the bilge piping as it is undesirable to pass this through the deep tanks carrying oil cargoes.
Testing deep tanks Deep tanks are tested by subjecting them to the maximum head of water to which they might be subject in service (i.e. to the top of the air pipe).
COVER Stiffener L L Figure 18.5 Construction of deep tanks.
Topside tanks Standard general bulk carriers are ﬁtted with topside tanks that may be used for water ballast, and in some instances are used for the carriage of light grains.
The thickness of the sloping bulkhead of this tank is determined in a similar manner to that of the deep tank bulkheads.
Transverses are arranged in line with the end of the main cargo hatchways, and in large ships a fore and aft diaphragm may be ﬁtted at half the width of the tank, between the deck and the sloping plating.
The tunnel should be large enough to permit access for inspection and repair of the shafting.
The additional space under this tunnel ﬂat is often used to stow the spare tail shaft.
Under hatchways the top plating must be increased in thickness unless it is covered by wood of a speciﬁed thickness.
On completion the shaft tunnel structure is subject to a hose test.
At intervals along the length of the shaft, stools are built that support the shaft bearings.
A walkway is installed on one side of the shaft to permit inspection and, as a result, in a single screw ship the shaft tunnel will be offset from the ship’s center line.
This walkway is formed by gratings laid on angle bearers supported by struts etc.; any piping is then led along underneath the walkway.
1 Basic design of the ship Chapter Outline Preparation of the design 3 Information provided by design 4 Purchase of a new vessel 6 Ship contracts 7
Further reading 8 Some useful websites 9
This is especially the case for some trades, for example LNG, where the ship is expected to work the same route for its working life.
For other ships, including bulk carriers, the ﬁrst cost of the ship is the major factor for the owner and the ship may be designed for ease of production.
All rights reserved.
Main deck Upper deck Ramps ER Hold Lift Tween Angled stern ramp Stern door ER Vessel has adjustable internal ramp giving access to decks Weather deck Main deck Hold Figure 3.3 (a) Roll-on roll-off ships.
(b) 7700 TEU container ship.
Escape trunk Aft peak bulkhead No. 5 hold tunnel flat Tunnel recess Shaft tunnel No. 4 hold Machinery space shaft ELEVATION IN WAY OF SHAFT
TUNNEL Heavier top plating Weld Weld Bracket Ship’s Welded stiffener Shaft Grating Support Piping Shaft Weld Grating Weld Stool supporting shaft bearings Welded stiffener Heavier top plating Double bottom Ship’s L Figure 18.6 Shaft tunnels.
This latter type of pillar may also be found in tank spaces where the crown of tank under pressure can put the pillar in tension.
These run from the forward or aft side of the hatch opening to the adjacent transverse bulkhead on the ship’s center line.
If this is not possible stiffening arrangements should be made to carry the load from the tween pillar to the hold pillar below.
For economic reasons the sections are fabricated in lengths from steel plate, and for the hollow rectangular section welded channels or angles may also be used (see Figure 18.7 ).
A small ﬂat bar or cope bar may be tack welded inside these pillar sections to allow them to be welded externally.
Stiffening under Figure 18.8 Small solid pillars.
Pillars have a bearing ﬁt, and it is important that the loads at the head and heel of the pillar should be well distributed.
At the head of the pillar a continuous weld is made to a doubling plate supported by brackets.
Details of the head ﬁtting vary from ship to ship and depend very much on the form of hatch side or deck girder that they support.
Where this is not possible partial ﬂoors and short intercostal side girders may be ﬁtted to distribute the load.
Machinery space pillars are fabricated from angles, channels, or rolled steel joists, and are heavily bracketed to suitably stiffened members ( Figure 18.7 ).
These may have forged palms at their head and heel, the head being welded to a continuous angle fore and aft runner that supports the deck.
The heel is then directly welded to the deck, which is suitably stiffened below (see Figure 18.8 ).
Some useful websites www.iacs.org.uk Copies of the IACS’s Common Structural Rules for Bulk Carriers are available on this website.
19 Decks, hatches, and superstructures Chapter Outline Decks 226 Deck plating 226 Deck stiffening 229 Hatches 229 Hatch coamings 232
Although all decks contribute to some extent to the strength of the ship, the most important is that which forms the upper ﬂange of the main hull girder, called the ‘strength deck’.
In general cargo ships these lighter decks form tweens that provide spaces in which goods may be stowed without their being crushed by a large amount of other cargo stowed above them.
All rights reserved.
Forward and aft on the uppermost continuous deck a forecastle and often a poop may be provided to protect the ends of the ship at sea.
The weather decks of ships are cambered to facilitate the draining of water from the decks in heavy weather.
Short lengths of internal deck or ﬂats are as a rule horizontal.
Deck plating The heaviest deck plating will be found abreast the hatch openings of the strength deck.
Other thickness increases may occur where large deck loads are carried, where fork-lift trucks or other wheeled vehicles are to be used, and in way of deep tanks.
The stringer plate (i.e. the strake of deck plating adjacent to the sheerstrake) of the strength deck, over the midship region and container ship cargo hold area, of ships less than 260 meters in length, is to be of Grade B steel if 15–20 mm thick, Grade D if 20–25 mm thick, and Grade E if more than 25 mm thick.
Where the steel deck temperatures fall below 0  C in refrigerated cargo ships the steel will be of Grades B, D, and E depending on thickness.
On decks other than the strength deck, the variation in plate thickness is similar, but lighter scantlings are in use.
decreased within deckhouses, if sheathed.
Before ﬁtting any form of sheathing the deck is treated to prevent corrosion between the deck plating and sheathing (see Figure 19.2 ).
Any openings abreast the hatch openings in a deck are kept to a minimum and clear of the hatch corners.
Deck transverses support the longitudinals, and these are built from a deep web plate with ﬂange or welded face ﬂat, and are bracketed to the side frame ( Figure 19.1 ).
Transversely framed decks are ﬁtted with deck beams at every frame, and these have scantlings that are dependent on their span, spacing, and location in the ship.
Within the forward 7.5% of the ship’s length these deck girders are more closely spaced on the forecastle and weather decks.
Each beam is connected to the frame by a ‘beam knee’ and abreast the hatches ‘half beams’ are ﬁtted with a suitable supporting connection at the hatch side girder (see Figure 19.3 ).
Both longitudinals and deck beam scantlings are increased in way of cargo decks where fork-lift trucks and other wheeled vehicles, which cause large point loads, are used.
In way of the hatches fore and aft side girders are ﬁtted to support the inboard ends of the half beams and transverses.
At the ends of the hatches heavy transverse beams are ﬁtted and these may be connected at the intersection with the hatch side girder by horizontal gusset plates ( Figure 19.4 ).
Where the deck plating extends inside the coamings of hatches amidships the side coaming is extended in the form of tapered brackets.
Hull form Between the 1940s and 1970 there was a steady increase in the speed of the dry cargo ship and this was reﬂected in the hull form of the vessels.
These provide further increased rates of loading and discharge.
Stud welded bolt Wood sheathing bedded in white lead or other composition Deck plating Wood plug Deck plating Tapered plank House side Deck plating Side plating 300mm waterway 50mm welded flat bar Caulked seam Figure 19.3 Deck construction.
Deep hatch end beam (or transverse) Gusset plate (see detail)
Hatch side girder Deck Hatch coaming Deck Hatch coaming For’d Aft Radius Figure 19.4 Hatch openings.
If used, then the ship has an increased Type B freeboard, i.e. there is a draft penalty.
Position 1 indicates that the hatch is on the exposed freeboard deck, raised quarter deck, or superstructure decks within 25% of the ship’s length from forward.
Position 2 indicates that the hatch is located on exposed superstructure decks abaft the forward 25% of the ship’s length.
Hatches that are at Position 1 have coamings at least 600 mm high and those at Position 2 have coamings at least 450 mm high, the height being measured above any deck covering.
Where the coaming height is 600 mm or more the upper edge is stiffened by a horizontal bulb ﬂat and supporting stays to the deck are ﬁtted.
Coamings less than 600 mm high are stiffened by a cope or similar bar at their upper edge.
The steel coamings extend down to the lower edge of the deck beams, which are then effectively attached to the coamings ( Figure 19.4 ).
These patent covers vary in type, the principal ones being fore and aft single pull, folding, piggy-back, pontoon, and side rolling.
Each panel wheel is permanently engaged on a ﬁxed chain located along each hatch side coaming.
PULL HATCH COVERS (c) DIRECT PULL HATCH COVERS
Figure 19.5 Hatch covers—1.
end coaming at the ship’s center line, driving endless chains running along the full length of the hatch side coaming port and starboard and connected to the leading panel.
Figure 19.6 Hatch covers—2.
Pontoon covers are commonly used on container ships, being lifted by the ships’ or shore cranes with the container spreader.
The gasket and cleat arrangements will vary with the type of cover.
Each pontoon section may span the full hatch width, and cover perhaps one-quarter of the hatch length.
Where portable beams are ﬁtted wood or stiffened steel plate covers may be used.
The beams sit in sockets at the hatch coamings and the covers are protected by at least two tarpaulins.
At the coaming the tarpaulins are made fast by battens and wedges ﬁtted in cleats, and the sections of the cover are held down by locked bars or other securing arrangements (see Figure 19.7 ).
Freeing ports are cut in bulwarks, forming wells on decks in order that water may quickly drain away.
The required area of freeing ports is in accordance with the Load Line Convention requirement (see Chapter 31).
The bulwark consists of a vertical plate stiffened at its top by a strong rail section (often a bulb angle or plate) and is supported by stays from the deck ( Figure 19.7 ).
On the forecastle of ships assigned B-100 and B-60 freeboards the stays are more closely
Figure 19.7 Bulwark detail and hatch with portable beams and wood covers.
Where the bulwark is cut for any reason, the corners are well rounded and compensation is also provided.
The crew may be located all aft in the poop structure or partly housed in any bridge structure with the navigating spaces.
All bridge superstructures and midship deckhouses will have a heavily plated bridge front, and the aft end plating will be lighter than the front and sides.
Likewise the stiffening members ﬁtted at the forward end will have greater scantlings than those at the sides and aft end.
Additional stiffening in the form of web frames or partial bulkheads will be found where there are large erections above the bridge deck.
At this major discontinuity, the upper deck sheerstrake thickness is increased by 20%, the upper deck stringer plate by 20%, and the bridge side plating by 25%.
The latter plating is tapered into the upper deck sheerstrake with a generous radius, as shown in Figure 19.8 a, stiffened at its upper edge, and supported by webs not more than 1.5 m apart.
Where deckhouses are built above the poop deck these are supported by webs or short transverse bulkheads in the same manner as those houses ﬁtted amidships.
The after end of any poop house will have increased scantlings since it is more exposed than other aft end house bulkheads.
Greater than 15% of length Clip Clip Clip Clip Clip Clip House side House side Plate webs Bulwark Bulwark stay Door Bridge front Door Rubber gasket DOOR SECTION HINGE DETAIL ELEVATION
AT END OF LONG BRIDGE PLAN
AT UPPER DECK DETAIL OF DOOR CLIP (b) WEATHERTIGHT DOOR
Hinge Hinge Rubber gasket Rubber gasket Bridge deck Bridge front Radiused plate with stiffened edge Handle Flat stiffener Bridge plating + 25% thickness Deck stringer + 20% thickness Sheerstrake + 20% thickness (a) LONG BRIDGE Figure 19.8 Effective superstructure connection and weathertight door.
A series of turret-deck steamers were built for ore-carrying purposes between 1904 and 1910; a section through such a vessel is illustrated in Figure 3.4 a. Since 1945 a substantial number of ocean-going ore carriers have been built of uniform design.
This form of ore carrier with a double bottom and side ballast tanks ﬁrst appeared in 1917, only at that time the side tanks did not extend to the full hold depth (see Figure 3.4 b).
The latter ship type carried oil in the wing tanks, as shown in Figure 3.4 c, and had a passageway for crew protection in order to obtain the deeper draft permitted tankers.
The common general bulk carrier that predominated in the latter half of the twentieth century took the form shown in Figure 3.4 d with double bottom, hopper sides, and deck wing tanks.
These latter tanks have been used for the carriage of light grain cargoes as well as water ballast.
Another type, shown in Figure 3.4 f, had alternate holds of short length.
The size of this type of ship has also steadily increased and the largest bulk carriers have reached 365,000 tonnes deadweight.
The ﬂooding resulted either in excessive hull bending stresses or excessive trim, and loss of the ship.
Some older ships have been ﬁtted with expansion joints that are in effect transverse cuts introduced to relieve the hull bending stresses in the houses.
Access openings must be provided to the houses and weathertight doors are ﬁtted to these openings.
These must comply with the requirements of the Load Line Convention (see Chapter 31) and are steel doors that may be secured and made watertight from either side.
Weathertightness is maintained by a rubber gasket at the frame of the door (see Figure 19.8 b).
www.tts-marine.com Hatch cover types and details.
An overall view of the fore end structure is shown in Figures 20.1 and 20.2 , and it can be seen that the panting stiffening arrangements are of particular importance.
All rights reserved.
Stiffener Breast hook Solid round stem bar STEM SECTIONS
Panting stringer Panting beam PLAN OF STRINGER I Wash plate Fo’c’sle deck Deep girder Upper deck Pillar Deep floors
Chain locker Pillar Deck girder Girder FORE PEAK TANK Pillar Stringer III Breast hook Stringer II Stringer I Solid round stem bar Breast hook Pillar Panting beam Stiffener ELEVATION AT SHIP’S CENTER LINE WASH PLATE WASH PLATE MUD BOX WASH PLATE Figure 20.1 Fore end construction.
The solid round bar is welded inside the keel plate at its lower end, and inside the radiused stem plate at its upper end, the shell being welded each side ( Figure 20.1 ).
It is necessary to support that part of the stem that is formed by radiused plates with ‘breast hooks’, i.e. horizontal plate webs, between the decks and below the lowest deck, in order to reduce the unsupported span of the stem.
Chain locker Bulkhead stiffeners Stem bar Panting beams Plate stem Wash bulkhead
Figure 20.2 Fore end structure.
From the construction point of view the bulbous bow does not present any great difﬁculty if this aspect has been considered when the bulb form is designed.
Floors are ﬁtted at every frame space in the bulb, and a center line wash bulkhead is introduced when the bulb is large.
Transverses are ﬁtted at about every ﬁfth frame in long bulbs (see Figure 20.3 ).
Smaller bulbs have a center-line web but not a wash bulkhead; and in all bulbous bows horizontal diaphragm plates are ﬁtted.
Chain locker A chain locker is often arranged in the position forward of the collision bulkhead shown in Figure 20.1 , below either the main deck or the second deck.
It can also be ﬁtted in the forecastle or aft of the collision bulkhead, in which case it must be watertight and have proper means of drainage.
Port and starboard cables are stowed separately in the locker, and the inboard ends of each are secured to the bottom of the center-line bulkhead or underside of deck (see Figure 20.4 ).
It is desirable to have an arrangement for slipping the cable from outside the chain locker.
A false bottom may be formed by perforated plates on bearers arranged at a height above the ﬂoor of the locker.
Where ﬁtted this provides a mudbox that can be cleaned and is drained by a center-line suction, the bottom plating sloping inboard.
Access to the bottom of the locker is provided by means of foot holes cut in the bulkhead, and the stiffeners ﬁtted to this bulkhead are of the vertical ﬂush cope bar type.
Each cable is fed to the appropriate locker compartment through port and starboard chain pipes from the forecastle deck.
These chain pipes or spurling pipes are of tubular construction with castings or other rounded end moldings to prevent chaﬁng.
Ships SECTION AT TRANSVERSE Fo’c’sle deck Breast hooks Pillar Upp. deck Deck girder Pillar Transverse Crown of fore peak tank Stringer Web Stringer No
. 4 stringer No. 2 stringer No. 1 stringer FORE PEAK Fore peak bulkhead Non W.T. flat Transverse Transverse Breast hooks STRINGER No.3 stringer STRINGER L Figure 20.3 Bulbous bow.
Figure 20.4 Chain locker construction.
d k. H atch Chain or spurling pipe Windloss Hawse pipe Foc’s’le deck Figure 20.5 Hawse pipes.
Hawse pipes To provide an easy lead for the cable from the windlass to the anchors, the hawse pipes must be carefully ﬁtted.
Today this can be achieved with the CAD hull model.
Tubular hawse pipes are generally fabricated, and castings are welded at the shell and deck to prevent chaﬁng (see Figure 20.5 ).
Additional stiffening in way of the hawse pipes is required at the side shell.
They are also to be found in large ships and cross-channel vessels where they are provided as an aid to docking.
Thrust provided by the impellers is low; 16 tonnes is perhaps the largest ﬁtted, but the unit size does not need to be large as small thrusts are very effective.
It is true, however, that the greatest thrust is provided at zero speed and as the vessel gets under way the unit becomes much less effective.
It has been shown that an appreciable increase in hull resistance and hence power may result if this detail is neglected.
Some useful websites www.brunvoll.no For details of tunnel and azimuth bow thrust units.
The cruiser stern (see Figure 21.1 ) was for many years the favored stern type for ocean-going ships, but today most of these vessels have a transom stern (see Figure 21.2 ).
Both the shape of the stern and the rudder type will dictate the form of the stern frame, and this will be further inﬂuenced by the required propeller size.
Where more than one screw propeller is to provide the thrust required to propel the ship, bossings or ‘A’ Ship Construction.
All rights reserved.
‘x’ Cant beam Cant beam Cant beam PLAN
PLAN AT RUDDER TRUNK Floor Floor Floor Floor Ship’s Inspection manhole TRANSOM STERN LOOKING FOR’D Centre-line bulkhead (corrugated) Figure 21.2 Transom stern.
brackets will be ﬁtted to support the outboard shafts.
Water jets, for example, are now a common feature on high-speed passenger and service craft.
Solid ﬂoors are ﬁtted at every frame space, and a heavy center-line girder is ﬁtted right aft at the shell and decks.
The stern plating is stiffened by cant frames or webs with short cant beams supporting the decks and led to the adjacent heavy transverse deck beam.
Cant frames are not required where the transom stern is adopted, as the ﬂat stern plating may be stiffened with vertical stiffeners ( Figure 21.2 ).
Deep ﬂoors and a center-line girder are provided at the lower region of the transom stern construction.
Panting arrangements at the aft end are dealt with in Chapter 17.
Stern frame It has already been indicated that the form of the stern frame is inﬂuenced by the stern proﬁle and rudder type.
The stern frame of a ship may be cast, forged, or fabricated from steel plate and sections.
To ease the casting problem with larger stern frames and also the transport problem, it may be cast in more than one piece and then welded together when erected in the shipyard.
Fabricated stern frames are often produced by the shipyard itself, plates and bars being welded together to produce a form similar to that obtained by casting (see Figure 21.3 ).
Sternpost sections are of a streamline form, in order to prevent eddies being formed behind the posts, which can lead to an increase in the hull resistance.
Welded joints in cast steel sections will need careful preparation and preheat.
Figure 21.3 Stern frames.
The rudder post is carried up into the main hull and connected to the transom ﬂoor, which has an increased plate thickness.
Also, the propeller post may be extended into the hull and connected to a deep ﬂoor, the lower sole piece being carried forward and connected to the keel plate.
Side shell plates are directly welded to the stern frame ( Figure 21.3 ), a ‘rabbet’, i.e. a recess, sometimes being provided to allow the shell plate to ﬁt ﬂush with the sternpost section.
Rudders Many of the rudders that are found on present-day ships are semi-balanced, i.e. they have a small proportion of their lateral area forward of the turning axis (less than 20%).
Two common forms of rudder are shown in Figure 21.4 , each being associated with one of the stern frames shown in Figure 21.3 .
The other plate, often called the ‘closing plate’, is then welded to the internal framing from the exterior only.
This may be achieved by welding ﬂat bars to the webs prior to ﬁtting the closing plate, and then slot welding the plate as shown in Figure 21.4 .
Other rudders may have a cast frame and webs with welded side and closing plates, which are also shown in Figure 21.4 .
The rudder is tested when complete under a head of water 2.45 m above the top of the rudder.
Rudder pintles Pintles on which the rudder turns in the gudgeons have a taper on the radius, and a bearing length that exceeds the diameter.
Rudder stock Rudder stock may be of cast or forged steel, and its meter is determined in accordance with the torque and any bending moment it is to withstand.
This coupling enables the rudder to be lifted from the pintles for inspection and service.
Rudder bearing The weight of the rudder may be carried partly by the lower pintle and partly by a rudder bearer within the hull.
In some rudder types, for example the spade type that is only supported within the hull, the full weight is borne by the bearer.
A rudder bearer may incorporate the watertight gland ﬁtted at the upper end of the rudder trunk, as shown in Figure 21.5 .
Rudder trunk Rudder stocks are carried in the rudder trunk, which as a rule is not made watertight at its lower end, but a watertight gland is ﬁtted at the top of the trunk where the stock enters the intact hull ( Figure 21.5 ).
This trunk is kept reasonably short so that the stock has a minimum unsupported length, and may be constructed of plates welded in a box form with the transom ﬂoor forming its forward end.
The other type is closed at both ends and has metal bearing surfaces lubricated by oil.
In the former type the bearings were traditionally lignum vitae strips and the tail shaft (aft section of propeller shaft) was ﬁtted with a brass liner.
Both types of sterntube are illustrated in Figure 21.6 .
Shaft bossing and ‘ A ’ brackets Twin-screw or multi-screw vessels have propeller shafts that leave the line of shell at some distance forward of the stern.
Bossings are a common feature on the larger multiple-screw passenger ships and are in effect a molding of the shell that takes in the line of shaft
Sterntube Shaft Stern tube nut Stern frame Composite or lignum vitae strips Tailshaft sheathed with liner Packing Oil header tank Gunmetal liner Sterntube Sterntube Aft peak bulkhead Stern frame Oil feed holes Oil seal D 3D 2D D D D D 2 3 4 Tailshaft Pump Oil outlet Locking nut Gunmetal liner Oil seal Oil vent Oil supply White metal bearing Hand pump Oil drain Aft peak bulkhead W.T. gland Sea water cock (seawater tube)
Retaining ring SECTION IN WAY OF BEARING STRIPS Figure 21.6 Sterntubes.
These amendments entered into force on 1 July 2006.
The midship section of a Handysize bulk carrier with double-skin construction is shown in Figure 17.8.
Whilst most deck spacing is to suit cars, some tween deck heights may be greater and the deck strengthened to permit loading of higher and heavier vehicles.
The spacing of ﬁxed car decks can vary from 1.85 to 2.3 meters to accommodate varying shapes and heights of cars.
Transfer arrangements for vehicles from the main deck are by means of hoistable ramps, which can be lifted and lowered whilst bearing the vehicles.
Loading and discharging vehicles onto and off the ship is via a large quarter ramp at the stern and a side shell or stern ramp.
A unit is an overall stowage area of 8.5 square meters per car and represents a vehicle 4.125 meters in length and 1.55 meters wide plus an all-round stowage margin.
Access from inside the hull is thus provided to the shaft over a great proportion of its length, and it is afforded greater protection.
Many large liners having high speeds are shown to have beneﬁtted by a decrease in resistance when bossings have been ﬁtted rather than ‘A’ brackets.
The arms carrying the shafts extend from this section, which may be split in two or more parts in some instances to aid alignment when it is erected (see Figure 21.7 ).
Although on smaller vessels the upper palms may simply be welded to a reinforcing pad at the shell, on larger vessels the upper ends of the struts enter the main hull and are connected to a heavy ﬂoor with additional local stiffening ( Figure 21.7 ).
The bore of the propeller boss is tapered to ﬁt the tail shaft and the propeller may be keyed onto this shaft; a large locking nut is then ﬁtted to secure the propeller on the shaft.
This ‘pilgrim nut’ may also be used with keyless bore propellers.
A fairing cone is provided to cover the securing nut.
lap Plate CAST SPECTACLE FRAME SECTION LOOKING AFT Floor Stringer Strut Floor Ship’s ‘A’ – BRACKET Propeller shaft FRAME IN WAY OF BOSSING Inserted frame Casting bolted at center line PLAN Floor Plate bossing Horizontal web Web frame Figure 21.7 Bossings and ‘A’ brackets.
Shrouded propellers To increase the thrust provided by a propeller of given diameter at low speeds and high slips it may be enclosed in a ﬁxed nozzle.
Single-screw tugs and trawlers are often ﬁtted with the ﬁxed patent ‘Kort nozzle’ where under a heavy tow the propeller is working at a high slip.
When running freely the slip is much lower, and it might appear that there was little advantage in ﬁtting a shrouded propeller.
The inner plating of the nozzle has a heavier ‘shroud’ plate in way of the propeller tips and this is carried some distance fore and aft of this position.
At this diameter the nozzle section has two full ring webs and a half-depth ring web supporting the inner and outer plating.
The advantages of electric podded propulsors are: 1.
The hull form can be designed for minimum resistance.
Flare plating Leading edge bar Trailing edge bar Cone plating Ring web Fore and Aft w s eb TRANSVERSE SECTION FORE AND AFT SECTION AT CENTER LINE Ring webs Shroud plating in way of propeller Flare platin g Shroud plating in wa y of propelle r Figure 21.8 Propeller nozzle.
Each of these podded propulsors has a 6-meter-diameter four-bladed propeller.
For each podded propulsor a seating is welded into the ship’s bottom structure to distribute the loads from the pod over a wide area of the hull.
The ﬁxed propulsors are bolted directly to their seating whilst the steering units are carried by a slewing ring in their seatings.
Power from the ship’s main machinery space is transferred to the motors in the steering pods via a slipring unit.
Queen Mary 2: Genesis of a Queen , The Royal Institution of Naval Architects, 2004.
The machinery is aft, and an expansion trunk, if ﬁtted, is on the center line in way of the tank spaces (see Figure 22.1 ).
There are those ships that carry reﬁned oil Ship Construction.
All rights reserved.
Trunk plating (11 mm) Flat stiffener Stiffener 175 mm × 8.5 mm Frame space clear of transverse Stringer Deck and trunk longitudinals 200 mm × 12.5 mm 175 mm
× 8.5 mm Bracket Stringer Longitudinal bulkhead Deck plating (11 mm) Sheerstrake 1500 mm × 12.5 mm Side shell (10.5 mm) Stringer Frame space in way of transverse Bottom plating (11 mm)
Bottom longitudinals 250 mm × 12 mm Keel plate 1075 mm × 16.5 mm Bracket Docking bracket Side frame Transverse Figure 22.1 Midship section of coastal tanker of less than 5000 tonnes deadweight with trunk.
products, and perhaps some other cargoes like molasses, which tend to be in the smaller 12,000–50,000 tonnes deadweight range.
Then there are the crude oil carriers that extend to the 500,000 tonnes deadweight range.
The protective location of these tanks had the effect of providing full or partial double bottoms and/or side tanks in way of the cargo tank space.
Mild steel As with dry cargo ships it is a requirement that Grade B, D, and E steels be used for the heavier plating of the main hull strength members where the greatest stresses arise in tankers.
Grade E plates, which we have equated with the ‘crack arrester strake’ concept (see Chapter 8), will be seen to be required over the midship region in ships exceeding 250 meters in length and are also required as shown in Table 22.1 .
Higher tensile steel Higher tensile steels are often used for the deck and bottom regions of the larger tankers, Grades DH and EH being used for the heavier plating.
The extent of this plating and section material is indicated in Figure 22.2 .
Length B.P Beam mld.
315 m 58 m 30.4 m Plate bracket Inner bottom Intermediate stringer WING TANK Longitudinal bulkhead Inner hull Floor 3.5 m 3 m ‘DH’ ‘EH’ ‘DH’ ‘DH’ ‘EH’ ‘EH’ ‘EH’ ‘DH’ ‘EH’ Figure 22.2 Double-hull oil tanker.
framed side shell, inner hull, and longitudinal bulkheads are all supported by transverse webs aligned with the transverse ﬂoors and deck transverses (see Figure 22.3 ).
At the side shell the upper longitudinals have the least scantlings, and a uniform increase in size occurs down the side shell until the bilge is reached.
The bilge longitudinal size then approaches that of the bottom shell.
For products carriers the deck longitudinals may be ﬁtted above the deck to provide a ﬂush internal tank surface for cleaning (see Figure 22.4 ).
The longitudinals can be offset bulb plates that may be built up to give the required scantling on large ships.
In way of the center tank a bracketed deck transverse supports the deck longitudinals and large plate brackets are ﬁtted between the longitudinal bulkheads and inner bottom (see Figure 22.2 ).
Within the double-hull side space they form a solid web and are supported by horizontal stringers (see Figure 22.2 ).
In the wing tank space they support the deck longitudinals and fore and aft bulkhead longitudinals, and in turn are supported by a mid-height longitudinal plate stringer (see Figure 22.2 ).
De ck Deck centre girder Flat stiffener Flat stiffener Flat stiffener Transverse Transverse Docking bracket Docking bracket Docking bracket Flat stiffeners Flat stiffener F la t s tiff e n e r Flat stiff ener Transverse Transverse O. T. transverse bulkhead Centre lin e bulkhead web O. T. transverse bulkhead ELEVATION AT CENTRE LINE OF TANK Longtl.
Tankers with two or more longitudinal bulkheads may have wing and center tank lengths up to 20% of the ship’s length.
Cofferdams, which may be formed with two adjacent oiltight transverse bulkheads at least 760 mm apart, are required at the ends of the cargo space.
Corrugated longitudinal bulkheads are only permitted in ships of less than 200 m in length.
Hatchways Oiltight hatchways provide access to the tank spaces at the exposed deck.
The openings for these are kept as small as possible, and the corners are well rounded, circular openings being not uncommon.
Coamings provided for the openings should be of steel and at least 600 mm high, and suitably fastened steel or other approved material covers are ﬁtted.
Other openings are provided in the deck for ullage plugs and tank cleaning, these being on the open deck, and not within enclosed deck spaces.
Testing tanks Each cargo tank and cofferdam may be tested separately when complete by ﬁlling the tank with water to a head 2.45 m above the highest point of the tank excluding the hatchways, and by ﬁlling the cofferdam to the top of the hatch.
Water is then transferred to the empty tanks, and the remainder of the bottom and side shell is inspected.
In practice, a combination of a structural water test and air leak test is often used.
The air leak test is carried out on the building berth, the tanks being subject to an air pressure similar to that required for testing double-bottom tanks.
Awater pressure test is carried out on one center tank and two wing tanks selected by the surveyors.
Clean water ballast tanks are tested in the same manner as the cargo tanks, but bunkers and deep tank test requirements are similar to those in dry cargo ships, i.e. a head of water 2.45 m above the crown of the tank is applied.
Any bulkhead not forming a tank boundary is hose tested.
Fore end structure Forward of the tank space deep tanks may be ﬁtted.
If longitudinal bulkheads are ﬁtted port and starboard in the cargo tanks, these may be extended to the fore side of the deep tank in lieu of a center-line bulkhead.
Where the depth of the tank exceeds 16 m the side transverses, and the web frames in a transversely framed tank, either have one or more deep stringers ﬁtted, cross ties, or perforated ﬂats with deep beams in way of the transverses or webs.
breadth of tank exceeds 70% of the ship’s beam, at least one solid bulkhead on the center line is recommended.
If the forepeak is longitudinally framed the side transverses have a maximum spacing of between 2.5 and 3.5 m depending on the length of ship, and are connected to transverses arranged under the decks in line with the side transverses.
These include several 20,000 tonne deadweight ice-breaking oil tankers.
Transverse or longitudinal side and deck framing may be adopted in way of the engine room and aft of this space.
If transversely framed, web frames are ﬁtted not more than ﬁve frame spaces apart below the lowest deck and may be supported by side stringers.
Transverse webs have the same spacing as web frames except in tween decks above the aft peak, where the maximum spacing is four frame spaces.
The aft peak and stern construction follows that of other merchant ship types, a center-line bulkhead being provided in the aft peak.
Any ice strengthening is similar to that required in other ships (see Chapter 17).
Particular attention must be paid to any endings in the midship length of the hull.
A typical FSU is of 100,000 tons deadweight with a storage capacity of 112,000 cubic meters representing 10 days production.
Crude oil from a ﬂoating production unit (FPU) is transferred to the FSU, where it is loaded via a submerged turret loading (STL) system.
From the FSU the crude oil is transferred to shore by shuttle tankers, which are loaded by ﬂexible hoses from the stern of the FSU.
An FPSO combines the functions of the FPU and FSU in a single ﬂoating unit.
Many oil tankers, more recently those with a single hull that are barred from some trades, have been converted to FPSOs and FSUs, but there are also numbers of new design and build contracts for such vessels.
Note: Tank stiffening above deck Figure 22.4 Oil products/chemical tanker of 12,700 tonnes deadweight.
For some cargoes tanks constructed of stainless steel are preferred.
Under the IBC Code chemical tankers are designed and constructed to one of three speciﬁed standards.
Type 2 and 3 ships carry products of progressively lesser hazards.
The IBC Code also deﬁnes cargo tank types.
Tank type 2 is an integral tank, i.e. it is part of the ship’s hull structure.
A gravity tank (G) is an independent or integral tank that has a design pressure of not more than 0.7 bar gage at the top of the tank.
A pressure tank (P) is an independent tank that has a design pressure of more than 0.7 bar gage.
Figure 22.4 shows a 130 m LOA type II oil products/chemical tanker of 12,700 tonnes deadweight.
The 130 meter length overall by 20 meter breadth by 9.75 meter depth vessel has 12 cargo tanks, equipped to carry six different types or grades of cargo simultaneously.
Each tank has a deepwell pump rated at 300 cubic meters per hour and the ship’s maximum discharge rate is 1800 cubic meters per hour with six lines working at the same time.
Common Structural Rules For Double Hull Oil Tankers .
www.iacs.org.uk See ‘Common structural rules for double hull oil tankers’.
Some useful websites 289
A large number of ships are in service that are designed to carry gases in liquid form in bulk.
LPG is used as Ship Construction.
All rights reserved.
a clean fuel for domestic and industrial purposes.
Lique ﬁ ed natural gas (LNG) LNG is natural gas from which most of the impurities such as sulfur and carbon dioxide have been removed.
Methane has a critical pressure of 45.6 kg/cm 2 at a critical temperature of  82.5  C, i.e. the pressure and temperature above which liquiﬁcation cannot occur, so that methane can only be liqueﬁed by pressure at very low temperatures.
The IMO international gas carrier code In 1975 the Ninth Assembly of the IMO adopted the Code for the Construction and Equipment of Ships Carrying Liqueﬁed Gases in Bulk, A.328 (IX), which provides international standards for ships that transport liqueﬁed gases in bulk.
Integral tanks These tanks form a structural part of the ship’s hull and are inﬂuenced in the same manner and by the same loads that stress the adjacent hull structure.
Figure 3.6 a was constructed, the expansion trunk and double bottom within the cargo space having been eliminated much earlier.
The greatest changes in that period were the growth in ship size and nature of the structure (see Figure 3.6 b).
The growth in size of ocean-going vessels from 1880 to the end of the Second World War was gradual, the average deadweight rising from 1500 tonnes to about 12,000 tonnes.
Since then the average deadweight increased rapidly to about 20,000 tonnes in 1953 and about 30,000 tonnes in 1959.
Today there are aﬂoat tankers ranging from 100,000 to 500,000 tonnes deadweight.
It should be made clear that the larger size of vessel is the crude oil carrier, and fuel oil carriers tend to remain within the smaller deadweights.
Service speeds of oil tankers have shown an increase since the late 1940s, going from 12 to 17 knots.
Little Length 77.6 m Beam Depth 5.8 m Deadweight 1680 tonnes Speed 10 k Expansion trunk Wing tank Center tank Wing tank Double bottom (a) Length B.P. 330 m Beam 53.3 m Depth 32 m
Deadweight 332,000 tonnes Speed 14½ k Center tank tank tank Wing Wing (b) DOUBLE-HULL TANKER SBT SBT SBT SBT SBT SBT SBT Center tank tank tank Wing Wing MID-DECK TANKER PRINCIPLE SBT SBT Oil Oil Oil Oil Mid-deck 10.4 m Figure 3.6 Oil tankers.
Membrane tanks are primarily used for LNG cargoes (see Figure 23.4 ).
Such tanks were developed for the carriage of LNG, but have been used for a few LPG ships.
LPG at or near atmospheric pressure or LNG may be carried in such tanks (see Figure 23.2 ).
The overall design concept of these tanks is based on the so-called ‘crack detection before failure principle’, which permits their use with a reduced secondary barrier (see Figure 23.3 ).
LNG is normally carried in such tanks.
The liners on their own do not act as liquid barriers and therefore differ from membranes.
Figure 23.1 shows the three types discussed below.
Wash bulkheads are ﬁtted in very long tanks.
and are designed for a maximum pressure of about 8 kg/cm 2 .
Antiﬂotation chocks are provided to prevent the tank ﬂoating off the bearings if the hold were ﬂooded.
Those types that have been or are more commonly found in service are described below.
At the beginning of 2011, some 350 large LNG ships were trading; older ships have independent Type B tanks of the Kvaerner-Moss design with most being of the membrane type.
FULLY PRESSURIZED LPG CARRIER 73,200 cu.m.
FULLY REFRIGERATED LPG CARRIER 5200 cu.m.
No 2 tank No 1 tank Figure 23.1 Liqueﬁed gas carriers.
Midship section 1 2 3 9 8 7 4 5 6 PLAN AT SECOND DECK 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Machinery Fore peak F.O. tanks Nitrogen tank Cargo tanks W.B. PROFILE PVC foam seal between balsa panels Aluminum cargo tank Plywood faced balsa panels Glass fiber
Inert space Timber furring strip Steel section Glass fiber Steel inner hull Figure 23.2 Liquid methane carrier.
Tanks consist of either an aluminum alloy or 9% nickel steel sphere welded to a vertical cylindrical skirt of the same material, which is its only connection to the hull (see Figure 23.3 ).
The sphere expands and contracts freely all movements being compensated for in the top half of the skirt.
The outer surface of the sphere and part of the skirt is covered with a polyurethane foam insulation.
The system is ﬁtted with a partial secondary barrier consisting of a drip tray under the tank and splash shields at the sides.
Above deck the spheres are protected by substantial weather covers.
The Invar sheet membrane used is only 0.5–0.7 mm thick, which makes for a very light structure.
Insulation consists of plywood boxes ﬁlled with perlite (see Figure 23.4 ).
Speciﬁc gravity of LPG cargoes can vary from 0.58 to 0.97, whilst LNG ships are often designed for a cargo speciﬁc gravity of 0.5 so that a characteristic of LNG ships in particular and most LPG ships is their low draft and high freeboards.
Fore end and aft end structure is similar to that for other ships.
All gas ships have spaces around the tanks that are monitored for gas leaks and in many ships these spaces are also inerted, an inert gas system being ﬁtted aboard the ship.
Liquid gas cargoes are carried under positive pressure at all times so that no air can enter the tanks and create a ﬂammable mixture.
bulk in integral or membrane tanks, or ‘100A1 liqueﬁed gas carrier’ where the vessel is designed to carry liqueﬁed gases in bulk in independent tanks.
Further reading Code for the Construction and Equipment of Ships Carrying Liqueﬁed Gases in Bulk .
Ffooks R: Natural Gas by Sea: The Development of a New Technology , ed 2. 1993, Witherby & Co. Ltd.
Further reading 305 Some useful websites 305
The past several decades have seen many changes in cargoes and thus in cargo handing.
All rights reserved.
The subsequent public outcry led to the United States Congress passing the Oil Pollution Act 1990 (OPA 90).
This unilateral action by the United States government made it a requirement that existing single-hull oil tankers operating in United States waters were to be phased out by an early date, after which all oil tankers were to have a double hull (see Figures 3.6 and 22.2 ).
The cargo tank space (see Figure 3.6 ) had a structural deck running its full length at about 0.25–0.5 the depth from the bottom, which ensures that should the bottom be ruptured the upward pressure exerted by the sea would prevent most of the oil from escaping into the sea.
Those with segregated ballast tanks with protective location were to be phased out by July 2021.
Heavy-duty cranes can have lifting capacities from 25 to 50 tonnes when using a cargo grab and have an outreach up to 36 meters.
The bulk carrier cranes may also be used for lifting hatch covers if these are not of the sliding or side rolling types.
Figure 24.1 shows in section the arrangement of one of three 30-tonne safe working load (SWL) wire lufﬁng cranes ﬁtted to one side of a 70,000-tonne deadweight bulk carrier.
This crane installation allows the ship to transsport cargoes outside draft restricted ports, the three cranes in this instance being capable of handling somewhat more than 10,000 tonnes in a 24-hour period.
Typically, two or three cranes per ship are provided with lifting capacities in the range of 36–45 tonnes, with outreaches between 26 and 40 m. With ship cranes, cargo spotting may easily account for as much as 40% of total crane cycle time, especially when slotting unit loads.
These cranes may also be used for handling pontoon hatch covers and are generally ﬁtted to one side of the ship (see Figure 24.2 ) with the structure below substantially reinforced to carry the loadings.
Awide range of standard shipboard general-purpose cranes with SWLs from 5 to 60 tonnes are found on general cargo and reefer ships.
These cranes may be positioned on the ship’s center line, but this may require an extremely long jib when the ship’s beam is large and a reasonable outreach is desired.
Pairs of cranes at one end of the hatch or at opposite corners of the hatch and with an ability to work through 360  can provide a full range of load/discharge options for a ship.
The cranes are also easier to control, making for faster cargo handling.
Tailor-made heavy lift cranes of 400- to 800-tonne capacity have been supplied for offshore and heavy-lift ships.
In some cases the latter have been installed on one side of the hull in order to perform a tandem lift with a maximum capacity of 1600 tonnes.
masts are often ﬁtted, but many ships now have various forms of bipod mast, which are often more suitable for supporting derricks, although some types can restrict the view from the bridge.
Sampson posts are often ﬁtted at the ends of houses and may also be found at the other hatches.
Topping block Span Span lead Cargo purchase Slewing guy Cargo lead SINGLE SWINGING DERRICK (a) Heel block Standing guy (b) UNION PURCHASE RIG Outboard boom Standing guy Carg o runner Boom plumbing hatch Hatch (d) YO-YO RIGS (c) BUTTERFLY RIG Cargo runner Standing guy Hatch Standing guy Shackle Figure 24.2 520 TEU container feeder ship ﬁtted with two 40-tonne ram lufﬁng cranes.
Where shrouds and preventers are ﬁtted these must be allowed for, which makes the calculations somewhat more difﬁcult.
Shrouds are often dispensed with and preventers may only be rigged when heavy derricks are used.
Each mast or post has adequate scantlings so that they may remain unstayed.
The short lengths may be tapered and are of different plate thicknesses to allow for the greater stresses experienced at the base of the mast.
Where connections are made for ﬁttings such as the gooseneck and a masthead span swivel, doubling or welded reinforcing pads may be provided.
Cross-trees, mast tables, etc. may be fabricated from welded steel plates and sections.
Derrick booms are as a rule welded lengths of seamless tubular steel.
The middle length may have a greater diameter to allow for the bending moment, to which the boom is subject in addition to the axial thrust.
Many cargo ships have mast houses into which the masts are built, the house being suitably strengthened.
These houses need not be designed to support the mast, the structure being of light scantlings and the support provided by stiffening in the tweens.
Where the house is strengthened the masts or posts generally land on the upper deck, but where heavy derricks are installed the mast may then land on the upper tween deck.
Since the derricks and mast are as a rule midway between holds they land over the hold transverse bulkheads, which lend further support.
Stiffened plate webs at the ship’s center line in the tweens and heavier stiffeners on the transverse bulkhead in the hold then provide the additional strengthening below decks (see Figure 24.3 ).
Heavy insert plates are ﬁtted in way of the mast at the various decks.
Derrick rigs Various forms of derrick rig may be used aboard the cargo ship, the commonest use of the single derrick being as a ‘single swinging derrick’ (see Figure 24.4 a).
Figure 24.3 Stiffening in way of mast and heavy derrick.
derrick booms may be used in ‘union purchase’ ( Figure 24.4 b), the booms being ﬁxed in the overboard and inboard positions.
Cargo is lifted from the hatch and swung outboard by the operator controlling the winches for the cargo runner.
Swivel for derrick head span block Eye plate welded thro’ derrick Span load Welded lugs for slewing guys Span pull Resultant load on span block Mast Shrunk and welded tubular sections Cargo purchase Derrick boom Boom thrust Span load S.W.L. Pull in lead S.W.L. + Cargo purchase +
Half boom Safe working load Resultant on cargo head block Resultant load on heel block Pull in lead Pull to winch Gooseneck seat welded thro’ mast
Figure 24.4 Derrick rigs.
Where a weight exceeding the safe working load of the derricks is to be lifted, the ‘yo-yo’ rig is sometimes adopted ( Figure 24.4 d).
Patent derricks are generally of the single swinging type with some form of powered slewing.
The Hallen swinging derrick is shown diagrammatically in Figure 24.5 a.
Of particular note in the very heavy lifting range is the patent Stu¨lken derrick ( Figure 24.5 b) marketed by Blohm and Voss AG, which may have a safe working load of between 80 and 300 tonnes.
One advantage that this derrick has is its ability to serve two hatches, the boom swinging through an arc between the posts in the fore and aft directions.
Forces in derrick rigs The geometry of the derrick rig will to a large extent inﬂuence the loads carried by the rig components.
Those dimensions that have the greatest inﬂuence are the length of boom, the distance between the boom heel and the masthead span connection (height of suspension), and the angle at which the boom is topped.
Force diagrams are shown for the rig components of the single swinging derrick illustrated in Figure 24.6 .
For a safe working load of 15 tonnes or less the forces may be calculated with the derrick at angles of 30  and 70  to the horizontal unless the owner speciﬁes that the derrick is to be used at a lower angle (not less than 15  ).
At safe working loads greater
Limiting height Curve of limiting heights (runners at 120 ° at any point of curve)
Loads vary in runners at 120 ° included angle unless boom heads are level.
Tonnes Outboard runner load 1.8 Tonnes 2.1 Tonnes Inboard runner load Inboard boom Outboard boom + 120 ° 120 ° 90 ° 30 °
Note: Figure 24.5 Patent derricks.
Figure 24.6 Forces in single swinging derrick rig.
A single-sheave block has a safe working load that is half the resultant, and multi-sheave blocks have a safe working load that is the same as the resultant.
The other half of the boom weight is supported by the gooseneck ﬁtting.
This includes an allowance for the rope friction, i.e. the effort required to bend and unbend the rope around the pulley, as well as an allowance for journal friction.
These diagrams indicate the safe working load of the rig, the ‘limiting height’, the boom thrusts (which are greater with this rig), and the optimum guy leads.
The ‘limiting height’ is that height below which all positions of the lifted weight will result in an included angle between the outboard and inboard runners of less than 120  .
At 120  , if the boom heads are level the inboard and outboard runners will experience a force equivalent to the cargo weight (see Figure 24.7 ).
If these are at too narrow an angle to the boom, excessive tension in the guys will result; a good lead is therefore essential.
There is available a suitable preventer for this purpose; the use of old runners etc. as preventers should not be tolerated.
In union purchase rigs it is possible to obtain a condition where the load comes off the outboard span, and the boom may then close to the mast under load.
At the design stage the guy positions can be adjusted to avoid this happening.
Both light structures of a discontinuous nature, i.e. ﬁtted with expansion joints, and superstructures withheavier scantlings able to contribute to the strength of the main hull girder were introduced.
Present practice, where the length of the superstructure is appreciable and has its sides at the ship side, does not require the ﬁtting of expansion joints.
This was brought about by the lighter weight of the aluminum alloy structure.
Heavy-lift derricks are tested at an angle of not more than 45  to the horizontal and other derricks at an angle of not more than 30  to the horizontal.
Its safe working load in single purchase.
Its safe working load in double purchase, if it is designed for that purpose.
Its safe working load in union purchase, if it is designed for that purpose, the letter ‘U’ preceding the safe working load.
3–30 tonne S.W.L. wire luffing cranes mounted on 70,000 tonne deadweight bulk carrier Figure 24.7 Forces in cargo runners of union purchase rig.
For example, SWL 3/5 tonnes SWL (U) 2 tonnes and a certiﬁcate of test and examination is issued in an approved form.
Re-tests are required if the rig is substantially modiﬁed or a major part is damaged and repaired.
British Standards Institution, BS MA 47:1977, Code of Practice for Ships Cargo Blocks .
The vehicles are driven on and off using large doors and a series of ramps to access different deck levels.
Ro-ro vessels may be ﬁtted with stern doors of the hinge-down or hinge-up type, which if large are articulated.
Bow doors are either of the visor type or of the sidehinged type (‘barn door’ type).
All rights reserved.
and the inner door is omitted.
This ramp may extend forward of the speciﬁed limit for the collision bulkhead above a height of more than 2.3 m above the bulkhead deck, i.e. above the height of a conventional tween deck space.
Stern doors and bow visors can be mechanically raised and lowered with wire rope and purchase arrangements, but in general they and the side-hinged bow doors are hydraulically opened and closed (see Figure 25.1 ).
These weathertight doors are casketed and cleated.
Ramps Ro-ro ships ﬁtted with ramps usually have a stern ramp (see Figure 25.1 b), but some vessels ﬁtted with bow doors may also have a bow ramp that doubles as the inner weathertight door and is lowered onto a linkspan when the bow visor or side-hinged doors have been opened.
Ramps may also be ﬁtted internally to give access from deck to deck.
These can be hydraulically or mechanically tilted to serve more than one deck and can be ﬁxed in the horizontal position to serve as decks themselves (see Figure 25.2 ).
In some ships they can even be raised into the hatch space and serve as weathertight covers.
Hydraulic opening/ closing ram Hydraulic securing cleats (a) HYDRAULIC STERN DOOR (b) STERN RAMP Stern door Stern ramp up Stern ramp down Figure 25.1 Stern Ramps and Doors.
Stern ramps can be ﬁxed axial ramps, ﬁxed quarter ramps, slewing ramps, or semislewing quarter ramps (see Figure 25.3 ).
The axial stern ramp may also serve as the stern door and can be lowered or raised hydraulically or by wire rope arrangements.
The quarter ramp was designed for ro-ro ships using ports that are not provided with right-angled quays or link span connections.
Slewing ramps serve a similar purpose to the quarter ramp, but are more ﬂexible.
The slewing ramp moves around the stern on a curved guide rail, the movement being affected by the lifting and lowering wire purchases, which are led to hydraulic winches.
Instead of a loading platform on ships trading to ports with high tidal ranges a ramp onto which the quayside fork-lift truck drives may be ﬁtted.
the Car deck Stowed position Loading position (to car deck) Position at car deck level (cars would be on here) PLAN VIEW OF RAMP Vehicle ramp Down Car deck Figure 25.2 Internal Deck Access Ramps.
Quarter ramp (a) LARGE STERN RAMP TYPES Slewing ramp Semi-slewing ramp Plan Ramp stowed Ramp down (b) LARGE QUARTER RAMP Elevation Figure 25.3 Stern and Quarter Access Ramps.
newsprint rolls being transferred from the loading platform to the elevator platform, which travels to the preselected deck or hold level for unloading (see Figure 25.4 ).
Combined side door/hatch covers are ﬁtted in designs where the ship is low in the water relative to the height of quay in order to provide sufﬁcient head room for forklift truck operation (see Figure 25.4 ).
The unit load is raised from the quay to a point above the ship’s side, swung inboard through 180  on a rotating frame unit and lowered through the hatch to the hold or tween.
Deck hatch Figure 25.4 Side Doors and Elevators.
to Japan, and lowered for the return voyage when 3000 cars are carried.
The car deck is the most common form of portable deck and common in ro-ro ferries.
Either commercial vehicles can be loaded using the full height between decks or, with the portable deck in place, two levels of cars can be carried in the same space.
Hoistable decks are lowered from and stowed at the deckhead by hoist wires led through a hydraulic jigger winch.
On the decks of ro-ro ships where the direction of lashing is unpredictable and vehicles must transverse the ﬁtting, a cloverleaf deck socket in conjunction with an elephant’s foot type of end lashing is popular (see Figure 25.5 ).
Also, of course, when ofﬂoading the fore and aft container is more easily received by road or rail transport.
The cell guides are not to form an integral part of the ship’s structure, they are to be so designed that they do not carry the main hull stresses.
Where four container corners are adjacent the cell guides may be built into a composite pillar (see Figure 25.5 ).
Lloyd’s require that the cell guide not deviate from its intended line by more than 4 mm in the transverse direction and 5 mm in the longitudinal direction.
Figure 25.5 Container Guides and Lashing Points.
Deck sockets like the container corner ﬁtting contain the standard ISO hole into which the stackers ﬁt (see Figure 25.5 ).
RINA Conference on RO RO Safety, June 1996.
Code of Safe Practice for Cargo Stowage and Securing .
House DJ: Cargo Work for Maritime Operations , ed 7.
Knot JR: Lashing and Securing of Deck Cargoes , ed 3, London, 2002, The Nautical Institute.
Some useful websites www.tts-se.com For details of ramps, doors, lifts, car decks, side loading systems, etc.
It is easy to see the reason for this if the Aquitania , built in 1914 and having direct drive turbines with 21 double-ended scotch boilers, is compared with the Queen Elizabeth 2 .
Tween deck clearances are greater and public rooms extend through two or more decks, whilst enclosed promenade and atrium spaces are now common in these vessels.
Initially relatively small, these craft may now be more than 100 meters in length and carry upwards of 500 persons plus 100 cars/30 trucks or more.
The latter have a high proportion of their twin-hull buoyancy below the waterline (see Figure 3.7 ).
An updated version of this Code of Safety was adopted in December 2000.
All rights reserved.
One suction is from the main bilge line and the other from an independent power-driven pump.
Bilge suctions As the vessel is to be pumped out when listed it is necessary to ﬁt port and starboard suctions in other than very narrow spaces.
However, where a ship has a single hold that exceeds 33.5minlengthsuctionsarealsoarrangedintheforwardhalflengthofthehold.
Adequate drainage to the bilge is provided where a ceiling covers this space.
If, however, the tank top extends to the ship sides, bilge wells having a capacity of at least 0.17 m 3 may be arranged in thewings of the compartment.
The shaft tunnel of the ship is drained bymeans of awell located at the after end, and the bilge suction is taken from the main bilge line (see Figure 26.1 ).
The strum box is a perforated plate box welded to the mouth of the bilge line ( Figure 26.1 ), which prevents debris being taken up by the bilge pump suction.
Perforations in the strum box do not exceed 10 mm in diameter, and their total cross-sectional area is at least twice that required for the bore of the bilge pipe.
Strums are arranged at a reasonable height above the bottom of the bilge or drain well to allow a clear ﬂow of water and to permit easy cleaning.
In the machinery space and shaft tunnel the pipe from the bilges is led to the mud box, which is accessible for regular cleaning.
Each mud box contains a mesh to collect sludge and foreign objects entering the end of the pipe.
Where the passenger ship has a length in excess of 91.5 m it is a requirement that at least one of these pumps will always be serviceable in reasonable damage situations.
A submersible pump may be supplied with its source of power above the bulkhead deck.
No. 5 Tunnel hold Engine room No. 1 hold No. 2 hold No. 3 hold No. 4 hold BILGE STRUM Bilge pipe Side of superstructure SCUPPER ABOVE FREEBOARD DECK
Suction connections are led to each hold or compartment from the main bilge line.
Bilge mains in passenger ships are kept within 20% of the ship’s beam of the side shell, and any piping outside this region or in a duct keel is ﬁtted with a nonreturn valve.
Bilge and ballast piping may be of cast or wrought iron, steel, copper, or other approved materials.
Scuppers Scuppers are ﬁtted at the ship’s side to drain the decks.
Figure 26.1 shows a scupper ﬁtted above the freeboard deck.
Below the freeboard deck and within the intact superstructures and houses on the freeboard deck ﬁtted with weathertight doors, these scuppers may be led to the bilges.
It is a statutory requirement that a ﬁre main and deck wash system should be supplied.
This has hose outlets on the various decks, and is supplied by power-driven pumps in the machinery spaces.
Provision may be made for washing down the anchor chain from a connection to the ﬁre main.
Air and sounding pipes Air pipes are provided for all tanks to prevent air being trapped under pressure in the tank when it is ﬁlled, or a vacuum being created when it is emptied.
Each air pipe from a double-bottom tank, deep tanks that extend to the ship’s side, or any tank that may be run up from the sea, is led up above the bulkhead deck.
From oil fuel and cargo oil tanks, cofferdams, and all tanks that can be pumped up, the air pipes are led to an open deck, in a position where no danger will result from leaking oil or vapors.
Sounding pipes are provided to all tanks, and compartments not readily accessible and are located so that soundings are taken in the vicinity of the suctions, i.e. at the lowest point of the tank.
Each sounding pipe is made as straight as possible and is led above the bulkhead deck, except in some machinery spaces where this might not be practicable.
Underneath the sounding pipe a striking plate is provided where the sounding rod drops in the bilge well etc.
a substantial box within the line of the shell plate containing the sea inlet opening (see Figure 26.2 ).
This opening is to have rounded corners and be kept clear of the bilge strake if possible.
The sea inlet box should have the same thickness as the adjacent shell but is not to be less than 12.5 mm thick and need not exceed 25 mm.
Where smaller tankers carry a number of oil products at one time, which must be kept separate, the pumping system is more complex.
The piping system is of the ‘direct line’ type, three or four lines being provided, each with Anode Sea inlet box Sea inlet grids positioned so that bars are in fore and aft direction Closing valve Mud box Sluice valve Figure 26.2 Sea inlet.
suctions from a group of tanks (see Figure 26.3 ).
Each pump discharge is led up to the deck mains, which run forward to the transverse loading and discharging connections.
These permit a ﬂow of the oil to a common suction in the after tank space.
Suctions from the main cargo lines are located in the center tanks.
Such an arrangement is shown in Figure 26.3 , which also indicates the separate stripping system, and clean ballast lines.
One may be ﬁtted aft adjacent to the machinery space, a second amidships, and where a third pump room is provided this is forward.
On many older tankers the piping was often arranged on the ‘ring main’ system to provide ﬂexibility of pumping conditions (see Figure 26.4 ).
1 2 3 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Machinery Pump room CARGO PIPING WITH PARTIAL FULL FLOW IN LARGE CRUDE OIL TANKER Pump room Water ballast Water ballast Filling lines Deep tank 2 1 3 4 5 Stripping line Cargo line Ballast line Bulkhead valves Figure 26.4 Diagrammatic representation of ring main cargo piping arrangement.
Oil tankers of 20,000 tonnes deadweight or more should have a ﬁxed deck foam system and a ﬁxed inert gas system.
On an oil tanker, inert gas may be produced by one of two processes: 1. Ships with main or auxiliary boilers normally use the ﬂue gas, which contains typically only 2–4% by volume of oxygen.
An inert gas generating plant may then be used to produce gas by burning diesel or light fuel oil.
The gas is scrubbed and used in the same way as boiler ﬂue gas.
Gas freeing may then take place at the cargo tank deck level.
Cargo tank washing After discharge of cargoes, oil tanker cargo tanks can be cleaned by either hot or cold water, fresh or sea water, or by crude oil washing.
At this stage the builder should have sufﬁcient information to tender.
The design of the ship is not complete at this stage, rather for the major effort in resources it has only just started.
Stability Figure 1.1 Design spiral.
a M n oit a d
-I T L U M L
There may then be no need to water wash tanks for the removal of residues unless clean water ballast is to be carried in the tank.
All rights reserved.
A simple corrosion cell is formed by two different metals in an electrolyte solution (a galvanic cell), as illustrated in Figure 27.1 .
The iron electrode, by means of which the electrons leave the cell and by way of which the conventional current enters the cell, is the anode.
The latter is typiﬁed by steel plate carrying broken millscale in sea water ( Figure 27.1 ) or corrosion currents ﬂowing between areas of well-painted plate and areas of defective paintwork.
A typical galvanic series in sea water is shown in Table 27.1 .
Some metals appear twice because they are capable of having both a passive and an active state.
This latter problem is overcome by insulating the two metals and preventing the ingress of water, as illustrated in Figure 27.2 .
This type of attack can occur in most places where there is water ﬂow, but particularly where features give rise to turbulent ﬂow.
Sea water discharges from the hull are a particular case, the effects being worse if warm water is discharged.
Vapor cavities, i.e. areas of partial vacuum, are formed locally, but when the pressure increases clear of this region the vapor cavities collapse or ‘implode’.
steel bolt Gasket (Neoprene tape)
Neoprene ferrule Steel angle Steel deck Gasket (Plascote 0306)
That is, if a plate is 8 or 80 mm thick, corrosion will take place at the same rate, not at a faster rate in the thicker plate.
Sacri ﬁ cial anode systems Sacriﬁcial anodes are metals or alloys attached to the hull that have a more anodic, i.e. less noble, potential than steel when immersed in sea water.
This system has been used for many years, the ﬁtting of zinc plates in way of bronze propellers and other immersed ﬁttings being common practice.
Sacriﬁcial anodes may be ﬁtted within the hull, and are often ﬁtted in ballast tanks.
Figure 27.3 shows such a system.
No protection is provided in port.
Care is required in their use in port alongside ships or other unprotected steel structures.
When spread out thinly the vehicle changes in time to an adherent dry ﬁlm.
The bitumen or pitch may also be blended by heat with other materials to form a vehicle.
These consist mainly of vegetable drying oils, such as linseed oil and tung oil.
illustrates the various types of high-speed craft.
Also see Figure 17.11, which shows the midship section of a high-speed wave-piercing catamaran.
Bhave, Roy G: Special trade passenger ships, The Naval Architect , January 1975.
Code of Safety for Special Purpose Ships .
High speed craft.
IMO: International Code of Safety for High Speed Craft (HSC Code) , 1994.
Meek: The ﬁrst OCL container ship, Trans.
Payne: The evolution of the modern cruise liner, The Naval Architect , 1990.
Some of these resins may react with the oil to give a faster-drying vehicle.
Other resins do not react with the oil but heat is applied to dissolve the resin and cause the oil to body.
Alkyds need not be made from oil, as an oil-fatty acid or an oil-free acid may be used.
( Note: Vehicle types 2 and 4 are not suitable for underwater service, and only certain kinds of type 3 are suitable for such service.)
This vehicle type is similar to the epoxy resin vehicle except that, as a two-pack product, a grade of coal tar pitch is blended with the resin.
On drying, the ﬁlm thickness is greater than would be obtained if natural rubber were used.
e. Vinyl resins.
The solids content of these paints is low; therefore, the dry ﬁlm is thin and more coats are required than for most paints.
The zinc dust is the sacriﬁcial anode with respect to the steel.
This causes a minor electrical current to ﬂow from the copper anodes, so that they are dissolved to a certain degree.
To prolong the useful life of the paint the toxic compounds must dissolve slowly in sea water.
In theory, ships could retain the paint if it was sealed under another coating but in practice TBTs are no longer at sea.
When the vessel is at rest some fouling may occur but once it is underway and reaches a critical speed the fouling is released.
Millscale is a thin layer of iron oxides that forms on the steel surface during hot rolling of the plates and sections.
Any corrosion from storage of the steel outdoors in a stockyard must also be removed.
It is also important to create a good surface for coating.
Swedish standards are often quoted, SA 3 being white metal and SA 2.5 being near white metal.
SA 2.5 is common as a reasonably achieveable standard for shipyards.
Blast cleaning is the most efﬁcient method for preparing the surface and is in common use in all large shipyards.
The shipyard preparation process has been outlined in Chapter 13.
Steel shot is the preferred blast medium for preparation of steel plates and proﬁles for new construction.
As the process proceeds the shot is recovered and reused.
The shot breaks down during the blasting and a mix of new and broken shot provides good surface preparation.
The use of sand is prohibited in most countries because the ﬁne dust produced may cause silicosis.
Pickling is no longer found in most of the ship construction industry.
Using an oxyacetylene ﬂame the millscale and rust may be removed from a steel surface.
Hand cleaning by various forms of wire brush is often not very satisfactory, and would only be used where the millscale has been loosened by weathering, i.e. exposure to atmosphere over a long period.
For ships in service hand cleaning may be used for very small corroded areas.
It is capable of restoring a steel surface to SA 2.5, provided any corrosion has not been allowed to develop.
Water blasting is mainly a ship repair process.
It should dry rapidly to permit handling of the plates within a few minutes and working the plates within a day or so.
It is common for shipyards to take complete units and blocks, once all the hot work is completed, for ﬁnal coating in a controlled environment.
The units are then blasted, if no primer has been used or the primer is degraded and unsuitable for overcoating.
Once cleaned the coatings can be applied in near ideal conditions.
Where the units are to be joined in the building dock, unpainted areas are left.
Paint systems on ships The paint system applied to any part of a ship will be dictated by the environment to which that part of the structure is exposed.
This may be based on vinyl and alkyd resins or on polyurethane resin paints.
The mechanical supply is by means of light steel sheet trunking, with louvres at each outlet.
All rights reserved.
Often, the cargo hold fans, which are of the axial type, are located in houses on the weather deck that enclose openings to the holds.
In older ships they may have been positioned in derrick posts where these posts are used to ventilate the tweens and holds (see Figure 28.1 ).
A dry air fan then passes this dehumidiﬁed air to the cargo hold ventilation system.
The midship section of a ship speciﬁcally designed for carrying only refrigerated cargo and its line of insulation is shown in Figure 28.2 .
Frozen meat is stacked in the holds of the ship.
Fruits and vegetables are stowed in a manner that permits an adequate ﬂow of air to be maintained around the crates, etc.
Damage repairs 43
Further reading 43 Some useful websites 43
All rights reserved.
AS VENTILATOR Cowl vent Welded web Derrick post PLAN Derrick post Upp.
Welded web Post thro’ tween Tween dk.
NATURAL HOLD VENTILATION Cowl vents Baffle House Tween Hold Figure 28.1 Hold ventilation.
Line of insulation Square pillar FROZEN CARGO FROZEN CARGO CHILLED MEAT Square pillar Square pillar Duct keel Figure 28.2 Midship section of refrigerated cargo ship.
Cork, glass ﬁber, and various foam plastics in sheet or granulated form may be used for insulating purposes, also air spaces that are less efﬁcient.
Insulating material is retained at the sides by galvanized sheet steel or aluminum alloy sheet screwed to wood grounds on the frames or other stiffening members (see Figure 28.3 ).
Insulation on the boundaries of oil tanks, e.g. on the tank top above an oil fuel double-bottom tank, has an air space of at least 50 mm between the insulation and steel.
To overcome this problem brine traps are provided in drains from the tween deck chambers and insulated holds.
The brine in the trap forms an effective seal against ingress of warm air, and it will not freeze, preventing the drain from removing water from the compartment ( Figure 28.3 ).
Air from the brine coolers is ducted to and from each insulated container.
Wood ground Drain Deck Brine BRINE TRAP
To bilge Side shell Side frame Wood ground bolted to frame PLAN Side shell Galvanized mild steel or aluminum lining screwed to wood grounds Insulation Fiberglass or foam slabs 50 mm air gap 150 mm
× 75 mm pitch pine grounds at 400 mm centers Tank top oil tank under 25 mm T&G softwood 37 mm T&G Kerung hardwood Figure 28.3 Insulation details.
The units are plugged into the ship’s electrical system by way of suitable deck sockets.
Some useful websites www.rockwool.co.uk
The functions of the IMO, only as it affects ship construction, are dealt with in this book.
The Council consists of an agreed number (40 in 2011) of representatives of member states elected for a term of two years.
All rights reserved.
Conventions do not come into force until stipulated numbers of member countries have ratiﬁed, i.e. adopted, them.
For cargo ships of 500 gross tonnage or more, the following certiﬁcates: a. A Cargo Ship Safety Construction Certiﬁcate valid for not more than ﬁve years.
For cargo ships of 300 gross tonnage or more, a Cargo Ship Safety Radio Certiﬁcate valid for not more than ﬁve years.
Oil tankers of 150 gross tonnage or more and other ships of 400 gross tonnage or more complying with MARPOL
Some useful websites IMO website at www.imo.org IACS website at www.iacs.org.uk Lloyd’s Register website at www.lr.org
Various port dues and other charges may be assessed on the gross and net tonnages.
Ships builtprior to that datewere, if theownerso desired, permitted to retain their existing tonnages for a period of 12 years from that date, i.e. all ships were required to be measured in accordance with the 1969 Convention by 18 July 1994.
All rights reserved.
Net tonnage The net tonnage (NT) is determined by the following formulae:
It will be noted that vessels with high freeboards, i.e. low draft to depth ( d / D ) ratios will have low net tonnages.
Squaring this ratio can result in excessively low net tonnages, hence the limiting value of 0.30GT.
These members of the IACS are:
The ﬁrst two of these common structural rules, for bulk carriers of 90 meters or more in length and for oil tankers of 150 meters or more in length came into force on 1 April 2006.
In November 2008 the IACS launched the IACS CSR Tracking Database ( www.iacscsrtrack.org.uk ) to provide users easy and quick access to full revision history of CSR rules on a paragraph by paragraph basis.
This is considered a more equitable system, since charges are now applied according to the transit needs of each ship.
In 2007 a revised system for CGT was developed.
Table 30.1 A and B factors Oil tankers (double hull) 48 0.57 Chemical tankers 84 0.55 Bulk carriers 29 0.61
All ships that do not come within the provisions regarding Type ‘A’ ships are considered as Type ‘B’ ships.
This reduction may be increased up to the total difference between the values for Type ‘A’ and Type ‘B’ basic freeboards.
All rights reserved.
In the case of Type ‘A’, Type ‘B-100’, and Type ‘B-60’ vessels over 225 m, the machinery space is also to be treated as a ﬂoodable compartment.
The full subdivision requirements are given in Table 31.1 .
Damage is assumed as being for the full depth of the ship, with a penetration of one-ﬁfth the beam clear of main transverse bulkheads.
The corrections to the basic freeboard are as follows: a. Flush deck correction.
c. Depth correction.
Where D exceeds L /15
no reduction is made, except in the case of a ship with an enclosed superstructure covering at least 0.6 L amidships.
e. Sheer correction.
Where a poop or forecastle is of greater than standard height, an addition to the sheer of the freeboard deck may be made.
The correction for deﬁciency or excess of sheer is the difference between the actual sheer and the standard sheer multiplied by (0.75  S /2 L ), where S is the total mean enclosed length of superstructure.
Where the sheer is less than standard the correction is added to the freeboard.
If the sheer is in excess of standard a deduction may be made from the freeboard if the superstructure covers 0.1 L abaft and 0.1 L forward of amidships.
The maximum deduction for excess sheer is limited to 125 mm per 100 m of length.
The minimum freeboard in the summer zone is the freeboard described above; however, it may not be less than 50 mm.
The freeboard for a ship of not more than 100 m length in the winter North Atlantic zone is the winter freeboard plus 50 mm.
For other ships, the winter North Atlantic freeboard is the winter freeboard.
No reduction of freeboard may be made in ships that already have Type ‘A’ or reduced Type ‘B’ freeboards.
Winter timber freeboard is obtained by adding to the summer timber freeboard 1/36th of the molded summer timber draft.
The width of bearing surface for the covers should be at least 65 mm.
Where covers are of wood the thickness should be at least 60 mm with a span of not more than 1.5 m. For mild steel portable covers, the strength is calculated with assumed loads.
The assumed loads on hatchways in Position 1 may be not less than 1 tonne/square meter for ships 24 meters in length and should not be less than 0.75 tonnes/square meter for hatchways in Position 2.
Where the ship’s length is 100 m or greater the assumed loads on hatchways at Positions 1 and 2 are 1.75 and 1.30 tonnes/square meter respectively.
The product of the maximum stress thus calculated and the factor 4.25 should not exceed the minimum ultimate strength of the material.
Mild steel pontoon covers used in place of portable beams are to have their strength calculated with the assumed loads above.
The product of the maximum stress so calculated and the factor 5 should not exceed the minimum ultimate strength of the material, and the deﬂection is limited to 0.0022 times the span.
Mild steel plating forming the tops of the covers should have a thickness not less than 1% of the stiffener spacing or 6 mm if that is greater.
Cleats are set to ﬁt the taper of wedges.
They are at least 65 mm wide, spaced not more than 600 mm center to center, and not more than 150 mm from the hatch covers.
Battens and wedges should be efﬁcient and in good condition.
Steel bars or equivalent are to be provided to secure each section of the hatchway covers after the tarpaulins are battened down, and covers of more than 1.5 m in length should be secured by at least two such securing appliances.
Coaming heights are as for those hatchways with portable beam covers.
The product of the maximum stress thus calculated and the factor of 4.25 should not exceed the minimum ultimate strength of the material, and deﬂections are limited to not more than 0.0028 times the span under these loads.
The strength and stiffness of covers made of other materials is to be of equivalent strength.
These are to be properly framed and efﬁciently enclosed by steel casings of ample strength.
Where casings are not protected by other structures their strength is to be specially considered.
Steel doors to be ﬁtted for access should have the sills at least 600 mm above the deck in Position 1, and at least 380 mm above the deck in Position 2.
Doors for access should be of steel, and the sills should have the same heights as above.
Should have steel coamings and where they exceed 900 mm in height they should be specially supported.
Vent openings should be provided with efﬁcient weathertight closing appliances except in the case of coamings exceeding 4.5 m in height in Position 1 and 2.3 m in height in Position 2, above deck.
Exposed parts of pipe should be of substantial construction.
The height from the deck should be at least 760 mm on the freeboard deck and 450 mm on superstructure decks.
Discharges led through the shell either from spaces below the freeboard deck or from within superstructures and deckhouses
Where the distance exceeds 0.02 L a single automatic nonreturn valve without positive means of closing may be accepted.
No side scuttle should be ﬁtted with its sill below a line drawn parallel to the freeboard deck at the side and having its lowest point 2.5% of the ship’s breadth above the summer waterline or 500 mm, whichever is the greater distance.
Where there is no sheer, A is increased by 50% and with less than standard sheer the percentage increase is obtained by interpolation.
The lower edges of freeing ports should be as near the deck as practicable.
Twothirds of the freeing port area is required to be provided in the half of the well nearest the lowest point of the sheer curve, where the deck has sheer.
Protection of crew.
Efﬁcient guard-rails or bulwarks of minimum height 1 meter are to be ﬁtted on all exposed parts of freeboard and superstructure decks.
The maximum vertical spacing between deck and lower rail is 230 mm, and between other rails is 380 mm.
Satisfactory means should be provided for protection of crew in getting to and from their quarters and other parts used in the working of the ship.
Gangway and access.
If houses are all aft, satisfactory arrangements should be made to allow crew to reach all parts of the ship for working purposes.
Should have open rails ﬁtted for at least half the length of the exposed parts of the weather deck, with the upper edge of the sheer strake being kept as low as possible.
Where superstructures are connected by trunks, open rails should be ﬁtted for the whole length of the exposed parts of the freeboard deck in way of the trunk.
The character ﬁgure 100 is assigned to all ships considered suitable for sea-going service.
Ships that the society agree need not be ﬁtted with anchor and mooring equipment may be assigned the character letter N in lieu of the character ﬁgure 1.
Type notation indicates that the ship has been constructed in compliance with particular rules applying to that type of ship, e.g. 100A1 ‘Bulk carrier’.
Cargo notation indicates the ship has been designed to carry one or more speciﬁc cargoes, e.g. ‘Sulfuric acid’.
Special duties notation indicates that the ship has been designed for special duties other than those implied by type or cargo notation, e.g. ‘research’.
All rights reserved.
Crowns of casings of main machinery spaces are to be of steel construction and insulated.
For new tankers of 20,000 tons deadweight and upwards the cargo tanks’ deck area and cargo tanks are protected by a ﬁxed deck foam system and a ﬁxed inert gas system (see Chapter 26).
Tankers of less than 2000 tons deadweight are provided with a ﬁxed deck foam system in way of the cargo tanks.
A plain stiffened steel bulkhead or deck has what is known as an A-O rating.
‘B’ class divisions are those that are constructed as to be capable of preventing the passage of ﬂame to the end of half an hour of the standard ﬁre test.
Various patent board materials are commonly used where ‘B’ class divisions are required and there are two ratings B-0 and B-15.
The standard ﬁre test referred to is a test in which a specimen of the division with a surface area of not less than 4.65 square meters and height or length of 2.44 m is exposed in a test furnace to a series of time–temperature relationships, deﬁned by a smooth curve drawn through the following points:
At end of ﬁrst 60 minutes 927  C Some typical examples of ﬁre divisions are given in Table 32.1 for a passenger ship carrying more than 36 passengers.
Greatest care is necessary in the case of openings in the main ﬁre zone divisions.
Vent trunking runs are ideally contained within one ﬁre zone, but where they Table 32.1 Typical examples of ﬁre divisions for a passenger ship carrying more than 36 passengers Bulkhead Adjacent compartments
Figure 32.1 Typical Examples of Passenger Ship Fire Divisions.
This usually takes the form of a steel ﬂap in the trunk, which is held open by a weighted hinge secured by an external fusible link.
The ﬂap must also be capable of being released manually and there is some form of indication as to whether the ﬂap is open or closed (see Figure 32.1 ).
Part Five Ship Structure Introduction Ships are the largest, mobile man-made structures in the world.
Because in most cases ships have to earn by carrying cargo, their structure not only has to be strong, it must also be as light as possible.
The structure of a ship is based on ﬂat and curved steel plate panels, with primary and secondary stiffening.
The structure also has to conform to the hull shape dictated by hydrodynamics, i.e. the performance in terms of speed and seakeeping speciﬁed by the hull designer.
The structure may suffer from changes in material properties over the life of the ship.
The basic components of the panels are steel plates and steel proﬁles.
The plates form the panels and the proﬁles are used to provide stiffening to prevent the plates deforming when subjected to forces.
There may be a keel in the form of a longitudinal center-line girder.
Frames, which run vertically up the side plating.
Floors, which are deep transverse frames on the bottom plating.
Deck beams, which support the deck transversely.
Ship Construction Seventh edition D. J. Eyres M.Sc., F.R.I.N.A. Formerly Lecturer in Naval Architecture, Department of Maritime Studies, Plymouth Polytechnic, (now University of Plymouth) G. J. Bruce M.B.A, F.R.I.N.A., MSNAME.
All rights reserved.
Notices Knowledge and best practice in this ﬁeld are constantly changing.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library Library of Congress Number: 2012936092 ISBN: 978-0-08-097239-8 For information on all Butterworth-Heinemann publications visit our website at store.elsevier.com Printed and bound in the United States 12 13 14 15 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Ice Class 1AA Ice Class 1A Ice Class 1B Ice Class 1C. The hull scantling requirements determined under these rules are based on certain assumptions concerning the nature of the ice load the ship’s structure may be subjected to.
Bending stresses, 68–73 ship as beam, 71
Dry bulk cargo ships are subject to an inspection of a forward and after cargo hold.
Docking surveys Ships are to be examined in dry dock at intervals not exceeding 2½ years.
Special surveys All steel ships classed with Lloyd’s Register are subject to special surveys.
Special survey hull requirements are divided into four ship age groups as follows: 1. Special survey of ships—ﬁve years old 2.
Special survey of ships—10 years old 3.
Special survey of ships—15 years old 4.
Special survey of ships—20 years old and at every special survey thereafter.
www.lr.org Lloyd’s Register website.
Tempering 48 Stress relieving 48 Steel sections 48 Shipbuilding steels 49 High tensile steels 50 Corrosion-resistant steels 50 Steel sandwich panels 50 Steel castings 52 Steel forgings 52
Further reading 52 Some useful websites 52
The production of all steels used for shipbuilding purposes starts with the smelting of iron ore and the making of pig-iron.
To provide the heat for smelting, coke is used and limestone is also added.
Molten metal may be drawn off at intervals from a hole or spout at the bottom of the furnace and run into molds formed in a bed of sand or into metal molds.
All rights reserved.
Length, where not speciﬁed as a maximum, should be a minimum consistent with the required speed and hull form.
Increased depth is therefore preferred to increased length.
For example, locks in the Panama Canal and St Lawrence Seaway limit length, breadth, and draft.
A maximum air draft on container ships of around 40 meters is very close to clear the heights of the Gerard Desmond Bridge, Long Beach, California and Bayonne Bridge, New York.
Newer bridges over the Suez Canal at 65 meters and over the Bosporus at 62 meters provide greater clearance.
Displacement is made up of lightweight plus deadweight.
The lightweight is the weight of vessel as built and ready for sea.
Deadweight is the difference between the lightweight and loaded displacement, i.e. it is the weight of cargo plus weights of fuel, stores, water ballast, fresh water, crew and passengers, and baggage.
When carrying high-density cargoes (e.g. ore) it is desirable to keep the lightweight as small as possible, consistent with adequate strength.
Beam and depth are the main inﬂuences.
Manufacture of steels Steels may be broadly considered as alloys of iron and carbon, the carbon percentage varying from about 0.1% in mild steels to about 1.8% in some hardened steels.
The furnace lining is constructed of an acid material so that it will prevent a reaction with the slag.
A basic process is used to reﬁne pig-iron that is rich in phosphorus and low in silicon.
The furnace lining must then be of a basic refractory to prevent a reaction with the slag.
About 85% of all steel produced in Britain is of the basic type, and with modern techniques is almost as good as the acid steels produced with superior ores.
Open hearth process The open hearth furnace is capable of producing large quantities of steel, handling 150–300 tonnes in a single melt.
It consists of a shallow bath, roofed in, and set above two brick-lined heating chambers.
At the ends are openings for heated air and fuel (gas or oil) to be introduced into the furnace.
Also, these permit the escape of the burned gas, which is used for heating the air and fuel.
Every 20 minutes or so the ﬂow of air and fuel is reversed.
For this reason only the arc furnace is considered in any detail.
In an arc furnace melting is produced by striking an arc between electrodes suspended from the roof of the furnace and the charge itself in the hearth of the furnace.
Steel from the open hearth or electric furnace is tapped into large ladles and poured into ingot molds.
Only those steels having less than 0.2% carbon and less than 0.6% manganese can be rimmed.
So long as the metal is molten, the gas passes upwards through the molten metal.
In the central portion of the ingot a large quantity of gas is trapped, with the result that the core of the rimmed ingot is a mass of blow holes.
The term ‘killed’ steel indicates that the metal has solidiﬁed in the ingot mold with little or no evolution of gas.
Steel of this type has a high degree of chemical homogeneity, and killed steels are superior to rimmed steels.
In the ingot mold the steel gradually solidiﬁes from the sides and base, as mentioned previously.
Heat treatment of steels The properties of steels may be altered greatly by the heat treatment to which the steel is subsequently subjected.
Annealing This consists of heating the steel at a slow rate to a temperature of say 850–950  C, and then cooling it in the furnace at a very slow rate.
The fast cooling rate produces a very hard structure with a higher tensile strength.
Steel sections A range of steel sections are rolled hot from ingots.
The more common types associated with shipbuilding are shown in Figure 5.1 .
a steel mill is required to set up rolls for a small amount of material, which is not very economic.
Shipbuilding steels Steel for hull construction purposes is usually mild steel containing 0.15–0.23% carbon and a reasonably high manganese content.
There are now ﬁve different qualities of steel employed in merchant ship construction and now often referred to as IACS steels.
Grade B is a better quality mild steel than Grade A and speciﬁed where thicker plates are required in the more critical regions.
FLAT BAR CHANNEL BAR TEE BAR TEE BULB OFFSET BULB PLATE ANGLE BAR Figure 5.1 Steel sections of shipbuilding.
High tensile steels Steels having a higher strength than that of mild steel are employed in the more highly stressed regions of large tankers, container ships, and bulk carriers.
Each strength level is subdivided into four grades, AH, DH, EH, and FH, depending on the required level of notch toughness.
the form of a honeycomb with ﬂanges to which the external steel sheets are resistance (spot) or laser (stake) welded.
SPS structures have been approved with an A 60 ﬁreresistance rating (see Chapter 27).
The main use of this system has been for repair of ships, especially decks.
A single steel panel is used to secure the elastomer core to the existing deck.
It does not appear viable for larger, ocean-going ships at present.
Where possible the working of the metal is such that metal ﬂow is in the most favorable direction with regard to the mode of stressing in service.
Some useful websites 59
Since the reduced weight of Ship Construction.
All rights reserved.
Such ships are moderate- and high-speed passenger liners having a low deadweight.
These can have beneﬁts in design of efﬁcient structures.
The plates can be joined to assemble deck panels, with minimum welding and hence a lower risk of distortion.
This involves forcing a billet of the hot material through a die of the desired shape.
More intricate shapes are produced by this method than are possible with steel, where the sections
However, the range of thickness of section may be limited since each thickness requires a different die.
Typical sections are shown in Figure 6.1 .
This speed may be a knot or so more than the service speed.
Nonheattreated alloy rivets may be driven cold or hot.
In driving the rivets cold relatively few heavy blows are applied and the rivet is quickly closed to avoid too much cold work, i.e. becoming work hardened so that it cannot be driven home.
The shear strength of hot driven rivets is slightly less than that of cold driven rivets.
The ﬁber provides the strength and the matrix in which it is contained, usually a plastic, holds the ﬁber in place.
The ‘Visby’ class corvettes, built for the Swedish navy by Kockums AB, have an overall length of 72.7 meters and a beam of 10.4 meters.
The largest composite vessel is the superyacht ‘Mirabella V’, which has an overall length of 75.2 meters and a beam of 14.82 meters.
The full load displacement is 700 tonnes.
For both a mine countermeasures ship and a luxury yacht the proportion of cost represented by the hull is small.
Major advantages of FRP for small vessels include low weight, combined with high strength and stiffness.
The hull is laid up as a continuous structure, with no seams, which avoids any possible leakage problems.
The mold is built using a former, known as the ‘plug’, which is an initial hull form.
The surface ﬁnish of the mold is important as this will determine the smoothness of the ﬁnished hull.
A coating of PV (a clear odorless liquid), known as the releasing agent, is applied to the mold to prevent the mold from sticking to the plug or ﬁnished hull.
Then a gel coat is applied, which once cured will form the smooth, water-resistant outer surface of the hull.
At this stage the gel coat can be colored.
The glass mat or woven roving is then laid onto the mold and the resin applied.
The mat can be cut to match the hull shape.
The hull is built up to the required thickness with several layers of glass.
These are usually a solid or hollow core former.
Once the hull, and ﬁttings incorporated into it, are complete the hull is left to cure until the resin is fully set.
The mold is often in two halves for small vessels and this allows it to be split to release the hull.
Some useful websites www.austal.com
Hardness is usually measured on a scale (Rockwell or Brinell), based on test results.
Hard materials such as cast iron are strong but brittle.
In comparing the strengths of various metals, stresses and strains are often referred to and require to be deﬁned.
The strain is the deformation per unit length or unit volume, e.g. if the tensile load P applied to the rod of original length l produces an elongation, or extension, of the rod of amount d l , then the tensile Ship Construction.
All rights reserved.
strain to which the material of the rod is subjected is given by the extension per unit length, i.e. Extension Original length or d l
If a mild steel bar is placed in a testing machine and the extensions are recorded for uniformly increasing loads, a graph of load against extension, or stress against strain, may be plotted as in Figure 7.1 .
Since stress is directly proportional to strain, the stress is equal to a constant, which is in fact the slope of the straight-line part of the graph, and is given by: A constant ¼ stress O strain This constant is referred to as the modulus of elasticity for the metal and is denoted E (for mild steel its value is approximately 21,100 kg/mm 2 or 21.1 tonnes/mm 2 ).
MILD STEEL Ultimate tensile stress Yield stress Stress (P/A) l
Ultimate tensile stress Proof stress Stress (P/A)
The yield stress for a metal corresponds to the stress at the ‘yield point’; that is, the point at which the metal no longer behaves elastically.
Many metals do not have a clearly deﬁned yield point, for example aluminum, having a stress–strain curve over its lower range that is a straight line becoming gradually curved without any sharp transformation on yielding, as shown by mild steel (see Figure 7.1 ).
The intersection of this line with the actual stress–strain curve marks the proof stress.
These tests usually take the form of a tensile test and impact test.
Therefore, a standard gage length equal to 5.65 times the square root of the cross-sectional area, which is equivalent to a gage length of ﬁve times the diameter, is adopted by the major classiﬁcation societies.
45 ° CHARPY IMPACT TEST Pointer Scale End of swing Hammer Specimen Start of swing Anvil CHARPY VEE NOTCH SPECIMEN Hammer blow 10 mm x 10 mm 55 mm 8 mm 40 mm 0.25 mm radius Figure 7.2 Charpy impact test.
In Figure 7.2 the principle of the Charpy test machine is illustrated, along with the standard test specimen for a Charpy V-notch test.
8 Stresses to which a ship is subject Chapter Outline Vertical shear and longitudinal bending in still water 67
Bending moments in a seaway 68 Longitudinal shear forces 68
Bending stresses 68 The ship as a beam 71 Strength deck 71 Transverse stresses 73 Racking 73 Torsion 73 Local stresses 73 Panting 73 Pounding 74 Other local stresses
74 Brittle fracture 75 Fatigue failures 76 Buckling 76 Monitoring ship stresses at sea 78 Further reading 78 Some useful websites 78
Therefore, there is no resultant force at a section and the body will not be stressed or deformed.
Total weight and total buoyancy are of course balanced, but at each section there will be a resultant force or load, either an excess of buoyancy or excess of load.
All rights reserved.
There are a number of ‘standard’ contract forms, all very similar in structure and content.
(see Figure 8.1 ), which are referred to as vertical shearing forces, since they tend to shear the vertical material in the hull.
The ship shown in Figure 8.1 will be loaded in a similar manner to the beam shown below it, and will tend to bend in a similar manner owing to the variation in vertical loading.
When sagging the deck will be in compression and the bottom shell in tension.
Classically the extreme effects can be illustrated with the vessel balanced on a wave of length equal to that of the ship.
If the crest of the wave is amidships the buoyancy forces will tend to ‘hog’ the vessel; if the trough is amidships the buoyancy forces will tend to ‘sag’ the ship (see Figure 8.2 ).
Longitudinal shear forces When the vessel hogs and sags in still water and at sea, shear forces similar to the vertical shear forces will be present in the longitudinal plane (see Figure 8.2 ).
Crest Crest Crest Crest
Trough Trough SAGGING HOGGING Longitudinal shear forces Figure 8.2 Wave bending moments.
This position is called the neutral axis , and at the furthest ﬁbers from the neutral axis the greatest stress occurs for plane bending.
It should be noted that the neutral axis always contains the center of gravity of the cross-section.
Occasionally reference is made to the sectional modulus ( Z ) of a beam; this is simply the ratio between the second moment of area and the distance of the point considered from the neutral axis, i.e. I / y ¼ Z .
The deck and bottom shell form the ﬂanges of the hull girder, and are far more important to longitudinal strength than the sides that form the web of the girder and carry the shear forces.
The box-shaped hull girder and a conventional I girder are compared in Figure 8.3 .
Strength deck The deck forming the uppermost ﬂange of the main hull girder is often referred to as the strength deck.
This is to some extent a misleading term since all continuous decks are in fact strength decks if properly constructed.
Along the length of the ship the top ﬂange of the hull girder, i.e. the strength deck, may step from deck to deck where large superstructures are ﬁtted or there is a natural break, for instance in way of a raised quarter deck.
Flange Web Web Web I SECTION GIRDER BOX GIRDER SHIP HULL GIRDER Flange Flange Flange Flange Flange Figure 8.3 Box girder and I girder.
Attempts to avoid fracture have been made by ﬁtting expansion joints, which made the light structure discontinuous.
Where transverse bulkheads are widely spaced, deep web frames and beams may be introduced to compensate.
A particular example is the larger container ship, where at the topsides a heavy torsion box girder structure including the upper deck is provided to accommodate the torsional stresses (see Figures 8.4 and 17.9).
waves and is pitching heavily, the large pressures occurring over a short time cycle.
Strengthening to resist panting both forward and aft is covered in Chapter 17.
Pounding Severe local stresses occur in way of the bottom shell and framing forward when a vessel is driven into head seas.
A sharp notch is present in the structure from which the fracture initiates.
A tensile stress is present.
There is a temperature above which brittle fracture will not occur.
Thick plate is more prone.
A ductile failure has a dull gray appearance.
Factors that are known to exist where a brittle fracture may occur must be considered if this is to be avoided.
Firstly, the design of individual items of ship structure must be such that sharp notches where cracks may be initiated are avoided.
Today strakes of higher notch toughness steel are required to be ﬁtted in such areas.
The greatest danger with fatigue fractures is that they occur at low stresses that are applied to a structure repeatedly over a period of time ( Figure 8.5 ).
With the growth in size of oil tankers, bulk carriers, and container ships there has been increasing use of higher yield strength steels in their hull structures.
Buckling of a structural member loaded in compression may occur at a stress level that is substantially lower than the material’s yield stress (see Figure 7.1).
The most common example of buckling failure is the collapse of a pillar under a compressive load.
DUCTILE/BRITTLE TRANSITION BEHAVIOR OF STEELS Fine grain carbon manganese steel Medium carbon (2%) structural steel Temperature ( C) o –100 –50 0 50 100 150 2.75 5.5 8.25 11.0 13.25 Charpy V notch impact energy (kg M) 16.5 FATIGUE BEHAVIOR OF PLAIN MILD STEEL Number of cycles x 10 5 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Ultimate tensile strength 21 kg/mm 2 42 kg/mm 2 Figure 8.5 Beneﬁt of manganese/carbon steel.
Contract expenses 14.
Condition for the contract to become effective 17.
ed 5, vol 2. Chapter 15: Ship design, 2001, Butterworth Heinemann.
Reﬁned ABS rules for very large container ships, The Naval Architect , October 2005.
All rights reserved.
Joints are produced more quickly.
Less skilled labor is required.
Reduced hull steel weight, therefore more deadweight.
Less maintenance from slack rivets, etc. 3.
Fusion welding is achieved by means of a heat source that is intense enough to melt the edges of the material to be joined as it is traversed along the joint.
By varying the ratio of oxygen to acetylene in the gas mixture supplied by the torch, it is possible to vary the efﬁciency of the combustion and alter the nature of the ﬂame ( Figure 9.1 ).
This type of ﬂame may be used for welding materials of high thermal conductivity, e.g. copper, but not steels, as the steel may be decarburized and the weld pool depleted of silicon.
Figure 9.1 Gas welding.
when the weld metal cools.
Usually a welding rod is used to provide ﬁller metal for the joint, but in some cases the parts to be joined may be fused together without any ﬁller metal.
Gas welding techniques are shown in Figure 9.1 .
The process is therefore only really applicable to thinner mild steel plate, thicknesses up to 7 mm being welded using this process with a speed of 3–4 meters per hour.
If the electrode is brought into contact with the plates an electric current ﬂows in the circuit.
The latter are most commonly used in shipbuilding.
Slag-shielded processes Metal arc welding started as bare wire welding, the wire being attached to normal power lines.
Stud welding Figure 9.2 Electric arc welding processes.
deposition on the joint prior to welding.
After mixing,the coating is then extruded onto the core wire and the ﬁnished electrodes are dried in batches in ovens.
Various electrode types are available, the type often being deﬁned by the nature of the coating.
An experienced welder is required where this type of electrode is used since it is less easily controlled.
Submerged arc welding This is an arc welding process in which the arc is maintained within a blanket of granulated ﬂux (see Figure 9.4 ).
A consumable ﬁller wire is employed and the arc is
maintained between this wire and the parent plate.
Stud welding Stud welding may be classed as a shielded arc process, the arc being drawn between the stud (electrode) and the plate to which the stud is to be attached.
Each stud is inserted into a stud welding gun chuck, and a ceramic ferrule is slipped over it before the stud is placed against the plate surface.
stud and the local plate surface.
The ceramic ferrule that surrounds the weld area restricts the access of air to the weld zone; it also concentrates the heat of the arc and conﬁnes the molten metal to the weld area (see Figure 9.5 ).
Apart from various forms of stud bolts, items like stud hooks and rings are also available.
Tungsten inert gas (TIG) welding In the TIG welding process the arc is drawn between a water-cooled nonconsumable tungsten electrode and the plate ( Figure 9.6 ).
An inert gas shield is provided to protect the weld metal from the atmosphere, and ﬁller metal may be added to the weld pool as required.
This may also be referred to as TAGS welding, i.e. tungsten arc gasshielded welding.
Basically the process is as illustrated in Figure 9.6 , a wire feed motor supplying wire via guide rollers through a contact tube in the torch to the arc.
An inert gas is supplied to the torch to shield the arc, and electrical connections are made to the contact tube and workpiece.
www.sajn.or.jp/e Shipbuilders Association of Japan; provides links to member shipyard sites.
Power source Controller Control cable Welding cable Stud welding gun Plate Stud WELDING CIRCUIT Stud Plate Ceramic ferrule Flux Straight thread Female thread Bent stud Flux Flux VARIOUS STUD TYPES Figure 9.5 Stud welding.
Cooling water TUNGSTEN INERT GAS (TIG) PROCESS Tungsten electrode Arc HF unit Power source Power source Figure 9.6 Metal inert gas welding.
Generally larger wire sizes and heavier currents have been employed in this work, metal transfer in the arc being by means of a spray transfer, i.e. metal droplets being projected at high speed across the arc.
Research in this direction was concentrated on the use of CO 2 as the shielding gas, and the MIG/CO 2 process is now widely used for welding mild steel.
Wire diameters in excess of 1.6 mm are used, and currents above about 350 amps are required to obtain this form of transfer.
On thinner plating where lower currents would be employed, a different mode of transfer of metal in the arc is achieved with the MIG/CO 2 process.
This form of welding is referred to as the dip transfer (or short-circuiting) process.
The sequence of metal transfer is (see Figure 9.6 ): 1.
Establish the arc.
Wire fed into arc until it makes contact with plate.
Resistance heating of wire in contact with plate.
Pinch effect, detaching heated portion of wire as droplet of molten metal.
Re-establish the arc.
Smaller wire diameters, 0.8 and 1.2 mm, are used where the dip transfer method is employed on lighter plate at low currents.
The process is suitable for welding light mild steel plate in all positions.
This form of welding may also be collectively referred to as MAGS welding, i.e. metal arc gas-shielded welding.
Plasma welding This is very similar to TIG welding as the arc is formed between a pointed tungsten electrode and the plate.
But, with the tungsten electrode positioned within the body of the torch, the plasma arc is separated from the shielding gas envelope (see Figure 9.7 ).
Plasma is forced through a ﬁne-bore copper nozzle that constricts the arc.
Microplasma—the arc is operated at very low welding currents (0.1–15 amps) and used for welding thin sheets (down to 0.1 mm thickness).
Medium current—the arc is operated at currents from 15 to 200 amps.
Because of the bulkiness of the torch, it is more suited to mechanized welding than hand welding.
This can penetrate thicknesses up to 10 mm, but when using a single-pass technique is normally limited to a thickness of 6 mm.
Nozzle Shielding gas Plate Plasma gas Tungsten electrode Cooling water Power source +ve –ve Figure 9.7 Plasma welding.
In Figure 9.8 the basic electro-slag process is illustrated; the current passes into the weld pool through the wire, and the copper water-cooled shoes retain the molten pool of weld metal.
A square edge preparation is used on the plates, and it is found that the ﬁnal weld metal has a high plate dilution.
If very good weld properties are required with a ﬁne grain structure (electro-slag welds tend to have a coarse grain structure)
A square butt with appreciable gap would be almost impossible to bridge manually.
If the applied power is higher (for a given speed), boiling begins in the weld pool and a deep penetration weld can be formed.
Both these methods can be used to produce spot welds or ‘stake’ welds.
Laser ‘stake welding’ has been used in shipbuilding, stiffening members being welded to plate panels from the plate side only.
Pulsed laser welding is normally used at thicknesses below about 3 mm.
Higher power (4 to 10 kW) continuous-wave Nd:YAG lasers are capable of keyholetype welding materials from 0.8 to 15 mm thickness.
Nd:YAG lasers can be used on a wide range of steels and aluminum alloys.
The Nd:YAG laser is combined with a metal arc welding gas (laser-MAG).
Thermit welding This is a very useful method of welding that may be used to weld together large steel sections, for example parts of a stern frame.
This steel isrun intothe mold, where itpreheats and eventually fuses and mixeswith the ends of the parts to be joined.
On cooling a continuous joint is formed and the mold is removed.
In producing butt joints it uses a nonconsumable rotating tool, the proﬁled pin of which is plunged into the butted joint of two plates 1 Friction stir welding was invented and patented by TWI Ltd., Cambridge, UK.
and then moves along the joint.
The plate material is softened in both plates and forced around the rotating proﬁled pin, resulting in a solid-state bond between the two plates (see Figure 9.9 ).
Both plates and the backing bar require substantial clamping because of the forces involved.
Plates of different thickness may be butt welded by inclining the rotating tool ( Figure 9.9 ).
Advancing side of weld Tool Figure 9.9 Friction stir welding.
The principle of the process as applied to the cutting of steel plates and sections in shipbuilding is as follows.
A narrow parallel sided gap is then left between the cut edges.
Alloying elements in small amounts are dissolved in the slag and removed when cutting steel.
When cutting stainless steels which have a high chromium content ‘powder cutting’ would be employed.
Apart from the torch, the equipment is similar to that for gas welding.
The torch has valves for controlling the volume of acetylene and oxygen provided for the preheat ﬂame, and it has a separate valve for controlling the oxygen jet (see Figure 9.10 ).
VE VE Figure 9.10 Metal cutting processes.
A perpendicular drawn to the waterline at the point where the after side of the rudder post meets the summer load line.
Where no rudder post is ﬁtted it is taken as the center line of the rudder stock.
Lloyd’s Length : Used for obtaining scantlings if the vessel is classed with Lloyd’s Register.
If the ship does not have a stern post or a rudder stock, the after terminal is taken to the aftermost part of the transom or stern of the ship.
All rights reserved.
Cutting units are available with cutting currents of 20–1000 amps to cut plates with thicknesses of 0.6–150 mm.
A gas cutting torch may be provided with special nozzles that allow gouging to be accomplished when the torch is held at an acute angle to the plate.
Ina laserbeam the light isof onewavelength,travels inthe same direction, and is coherent, i.e. all the waves are in phase.
Such a beam can be focused to give high energy densities.
For welding and cutting the beam is generated in a CO 2 laser.
The tube emits infrared radiation with a wavelength of about 1.6 m m and is capable of delivering outputs up to 20 kW.
Laser cutting relies on keyholing to penetrate the thickness, and the molten metal is blown out of the hole by a gas jet.
A nozzle is ﬁtted concentric with the output from a CO 2 laser so that a gas jet can be directed at the work coaxial with the laser beam.
Water jet cutting can be used on a range of materials such as timber, plastics, rubber, etc., as well as steels and aluminum alloys.
Water jet cutting is slower than most thermal cutting processes and is not a portable machine tool.
Welding distortion 107 Welding sequences 107
Testing welds 110 Weld faults 110 Nondestructive testing 112 Classi ﬁ cation society weld tests 114 Further reading 115 Some useful websites 115
The strongest welded joint that may be produced in two plates subsequently subjected to a tensile pull is the butt joint.
In mild steel the weld metal tends to have a higher yield strength than the plate material (see Figure 10.1 ).
Since a good butt weld in tension has a strength equivalent to that of the mild steel plate, it is not considered as a line of structural weakness.
Lapped joints, where ﬁllet welds are used to connect the plates, should be avoided in strength members of a welded structure.
As the ﬁllet welds are in shear when the plates are in tension, the strength of the joint is very much less than that of the plate material or butt joint.
The fatigue strength of ﬁllet welds is also inferior to that of a butt weld.
All rights reserved.
Ideally 45 ° Width Figure 10.1 Stress–strain relationship for parent/weld metals and butt/ﬁllet weld detail.
A good example is the use of a cut-down channel bar used as a deck beam, the upper ﬂange providing the backing bar for a deck panel butt weld, made by machine above.
Tack welds are used throughout the construction to hold plates and sections in place after alignment and prior to completion of the full butt or ﬁllet weld.
These are short light runs of weld metal, which may be welded over, or cut out in more critical joints during the ﬁnal welding of the joint.
Where ﬁllets are intermittent they may be either staggered or chain welded (see Figure 10.2 ), the member may also be scalloped to give the same result when continuously welded.
On thicker plates it becomes necessary to bevel the edges of plates that are to be butted together in order to achieve complete penetration of the weld metal ( Figure 10.2 ).
This operation may be carried out whilst proﬁling or trimming the plate edges, which must be aligned correctly.
Most edge preparations are made by gas or plasma heads having three nozzles out of phase that can be set at different angles to give the required bevels.
To ease the assembly of welded units it is common practice to make use of what is known as an ‘egg box’ construction.
To join the plates, highspeed one-sided submerged arc welding (see Figure 9.4) is used.
The operator selects the plate thickness and starts the machine.
60 ° SQUARE VEE Nose DOUBLE VEE Heavy plate Heavy plate Heavy plate Heavy plate ‘U’ BUTT Plate 6mm–18mm thick Plate less than 6mm thick (manual) 60 ° 60 ° 60
Greater than 1.125t t FILLET VEE FILLET J Not greater than 0.25 D or 75 mm whichever is less LAP WELD (BAD PRACTICE)
Figure 10.2 Plate edge preparation.
The welded plate panel is then moved over ﬂoor-mounted rollers to the next stage where the stiffening members are to be attached.
Welding is carried out using ﬂux-cored wires with CO 2 gas shielding.
The slower cooling of the weld causes the plate to move as the weld contracts.
The need to adjust distorted parts so that they ﬁt correctly can take considerable time and effort.
The plates are cut oversized and the shrinkage after welding brings it to the correct size.
More recently, work has been carried out to model shrinkage of more complex parts, for example structural webs with face ﬂats.
Again, these parts can then have their dimensions adjusted prior to cutting so that the effect of shrinkage is to bring them to the correct shape.
The cause is the same as in-plane shrinkage, but the distortion is often associated with ﬁllet welds used to attach stiffeners to plates.
The ﬁllet welds, as they shrink, pull the plate out of plane, resulting in the typical appearance of a welded hull with indentations between the frames.
The effect is much more noticeable for thin plate structures, for smaller ships, and for superstructures.
The causes of distortion are complex and also include any residual stresses in the steel plate as a result of the steel mill rolling and cooling.
metal laid down by an electrode to suit the required cross-section of weld (see Figure 10.3 ).
Of the more important welds in the construction of the ship the sequences involving welding of butts and seams in plating panels may be considered (see Figure 10.4 ).
the ends to renew the seam edge preparation before welding the seam.
Welding the seam ﬁrst would cause high restraint across the plate strake and when the butt was ﬁnished a crack might occur.
In welded ships the lower side plating seams should not be welded before the upper seams, particularly the deck and gunwale seams.
If this sequence of welding the side shell were adopted the upper portion of the hull structure would tend to be shortened, causing the hull to rise from the blocks at the ends.
Where in modern construction the side shell and deck plating are erected in blocks and a suitable welding sequence is employed, this problem does not arise.
Finally, the vertical framing is welded in way of the seams ( Figure 10.4 ).
Weld faults Various faults may be observed in butt and ﬁllet welds.
Different faults are illustrated in Figure 10.5 .
the least molded depth measured from the top of keel, or the length from the fore-side of stem to the axis of rudder stock on that waterline, if that is greater.
In ships designed with a rake of keel the waterline on which this length is measured is taken parallel to the design waterline.
Molded dimensions are often referred to; these are taken to the inside of plating on a metal ship.
Base Line : A horizontal line drawn at the top of the keel plate.
Molded Beam : Measured at the midship section, this is the maximum molded breadth of the ship.
Molded Draft : Measured from the base line to the summer load line at the midship section.
Molded Depth : Measured from the base line to the heel of the upper deck beam at the ship’s side amidships.
Extreme Draft : Taken from the lowest point of keel to the summer load line.
Draft marks represent extreme drafts.
Extreme Depth : Depth of vessel at ship’s side from upper deck to lowest point of keel.
The vertical distance measured at the ship’s side between the summer load line (or service draft) and the freeboard deck.
Measured as the height of deck at side at any point above the height of deck at side amidships.
Measured as the height of deck at center above the height of deck at side.
Straight line camber is used on many large ships to simplify construction.
Rise of Floor (or Deadrise) : The rise of the bottom shell plating line above the base line.
This rise is measured at the line of molded beam.
Large cargo ships often have no rise of ﬂoor.
Tumblehome : The inward curvature of the side shell above the summer load line.
This is unusual on modern ships.
The outward curvature of the side shell above the waterline.
It promotes dryness and is therefore associated with the fore end of ship.
Stem Rake : Inclination of the stem line from the vertical.
Keel Rake : Inclination of the keel line from the horizontal.
Small craft occasionally have forward rake of keel to bring propellers above the line of keel.
Tween Deck Height : Vertical distance between adjacent decks measured from the tops of deck beams at ship’s side.
Either X-ray or gamma-ray devices may be used to provide the source of radiation.
Only a small percentage of this energy is converted to X-rays, so that large amounts of heat have to be conducted away from the target.
Weld Traverse Probe Reflected probe ULTRASONIC PROBE TRAVERSE OF BUTT WELD Probe traverse Timer Figure 10.6 Inspection of welds.
Tensile, bend, and impact tests are carried out on the deposited weld metal and welded plate specimens.
The slipways on which the ships are constructed piece by piece are supported by small and simple workshops.
All rights reserved.
The layout of a shipyard did not vary signiﬁcantly until the mid 1950s.
These had extensive outﬁtting workshops and quays, as well as larger slipways.
Large cranes, almost always ﬁxed in position, were available to lift heavy items, perhaps 200 tonnes for large, complex ships.
At that time a typical cargo ship was of below 10,000 deadweight tonnes, and a tanker of 20,000 deadweight tonnes was considered large.
By 1958, the ﬁrst tanker over 100,000 deadweight tones was in operation and the ﬁrst over 200,000 tonnes deadweight by 1966.
An important aspect of these newer ships was a tenfold increase in steelweight, from a typical 3000 tonnes to 30,000 tonnes.
Also, the largest ships were in excess of 300 meters in length.
The result was ﬁrst that existing shipyards reduced the number of slipways and increased the size of their cranes as the ship size increased.
This allowed them to construct the ships in a shorter time, so keeping the construction time acceptable.
A very few European shipyards increased the slipway sizes and cranes to be able to build VLCCs.
In many cases the shipyards are constrained as to the size and type of ship that can be built.
An ideal layout for a modern shipyard is based on a production ﬂow basis, as in Figure 11.2 , with the shipyard built on a greenﬁeld site and no longer, as with existing
shipyards, having to follow the river bank.
Figure 11.2 Modern, large shipyard layout.
Before considering the actual layout of the shipyard, it is as well to consider the relationship of the work processes involved in building a ship, as illustrated in Figure 11.3 .
An idealized layout of a new shipyard is indicated in Figure 11.4 , which might be appropriate for a smaller yard specializing in one or two standard type ships with a fairly high throughput so that one covered building dock or berth is sufﬁcient.
The greatest disadvantage of the building dock is its high initial cost.
This doubles the available time for outﬁtting the ship.
Chinese shipbuilders on the way to the top: The Naval Architect , September 2005.
Covered hall beneﬁt for Bijlsma: The Naval Architect , May 2002.
Run : The immersed body of the vessel aft of the parallel middle body.
Tonnage : This is often referred to when the size of the vessel is discussed, and the gross tonnage is quoted from Lloyd’s Register.
The principal dimensions of the ship are illustrated in Figure 2.1 .
VLCC (Very Large Crude Carrier) is a tanker usually between 200,000 tonnes and 300,000 tonnes deadweight.
Suezmax indicates the largest oil tanker that can transit the current Suez Canal fully laden, being about 150,000 tonnes deadweight.
Variously reported as being 80,000 to 115,000 tones deadweight.
Panamax is the maximum size of oil tanker, with beam restriction of 32.2 meters and length restriction of 275 meters, that can transit the Panama Canal prior to completion of the planned new locks.
Typical size is about 55,000–70,000 tonnes deadweight.
All bulk carriers above 80,000 tonnes deadweight fall into this category.
Most are up to 170,000 tonnes deadweight but a small number are larger for speciﬁc trade routes, the biggest being 365,000 tonnes deadweight.
Handymax ships are between around 35,000 and 60,000 tonnes deadweight.
Ships between 10,000 and 35,000 tonnes deadweight have formed the majority of the ﬂeet for many years and are designated ‘Handysize’.
In recent years the size of these ships has been increasing and the term ‘Handymax’ has been applied to designate the larger bulk carriers.
The site includes virtual shipyard tours explaining the process used.
www.shi.samsung.co.kr Take the virtual tour of the Geoje Shipyard.
Building large ships on a new site with building docks.
http://www.fsg-ship.de/198-1-latest-videos.html Shows construction of mainly ro-ro ships on a modernized, covered slipway.
Further reading 134 Some useful websites 134
All rights reserved.
Ship drawing of ﬁ ce
Two plans of particular signiﬁcance were the ship’s ‘lines plan’ and ‘shell expansion’.
The lines plan is a drawing, to a suitable scale, typically 1:100, of the molded lines of the vessel in plan, proﬁle, and section.
Usually, 10 equally spaced sections are selected with half ordinates at the ends where a greater change of shape occurs.
The lines of the lateral sections in the sheer plan as indicated are referred to as ‘bow lines’ forward and ‘buttock lines’ aft.
When the lines plan was completed manually the draughtsmen would compile a ‘table of offsets’, i.e. a list of half breadths, heights of decks and stringer, etc., at each of the drawn stations.
PLAN (waterlines) AFT
loftsmen for full-size or 10:1 scale fairing.
The offsets used for building the ship would subsequently be lifted by the loftsman from the full size or 10:1 scale lines for each frame.
Shipyards therefore made use of a ‘half block model’, which was in effect a scale model of half the ship’s hull from the center line outboard, mounted on a base board.
The model was either made up of solid wooden sections with faired wood battens to form the exterior, or of laminated planes of wood faired as a whole.
Finished with a white lacquer, the model was used to draw on the frame lines, plate seams and butts, lines of decks, stringers, girders, bulkheads, ﬂats, stem and stern rabbets, openings in shell, bossings, etc.
This technique illustrates both the side and bottom plating as a continuous whole.
In Figure 12.2 a typical shell expansion for a tanker is illustrated.
The mold loft in a shipyard was a large covered wooden ﬂoor area suitable for laying off ship details at full size.
When the loftsmen received the scale lines plan, and offsets from the drawing ofﬁce, the lines would be laid off on the mold loft ﬂoor full size and then faired.
Fairing was achieved by using wooden battens that were bent to follow the offsets,
Bottom A plating Keel plate FRAMING, STRINGERS, DECKS AND OPENINGS IN SIDE SHELL ARE ALSO SHOWN ON THE SHELL EXPANSION BUT HAVE BEEN OMITTED FOR CLARITY B5 B4 B3 C8 C7 C6 C5 C4 C3 C2 Figure 12.2 Shell expansion.
then held in place while the fair curve was inscribed on the wooden ﬂoor.
This would mean using a great area of ﬂoor, even though a contracted sheer and plan were normally drawn, and aft and forward body lines were laid over one another.
Body sections were laid out full size as they were faired to form what was known as a ‘scrieve board’.
10:1 scale lofting In the late 1950s the 10:1 lofting system was introduced and was eventually widely adopted.
Lines could be faired on a 10:1 scale and a 10:1 scale scrieve board created.
Many of the outlines of plates to be cut by the proﬁler could be traced directly from the scrieve board, for example ﬂoors and transverses.
The hull design was drawn by hand and stored on the computer as tables of offsets for use in the mold loft.
Early developments for steel plate cutting and even frame bending were also seen in a few shipyards in the 1960s.
Weld lengths and types, steel weights, and detailed parts lists can be processed from the information on the drawing and passed to the production control systems.
Figure 12.3 Ship product model.
For a numerically controlled proﬁling machine the piece parts to be cut can be ‘nested’, i.e. ﬁtted into the most economic plate, which can be handled by the machine with minimum wastage (see Figure 12.4 ).
The order in which parts are to be marked and cut can be deﬁned by drawing the tool head around the parts on the graphics screen.
When the burning instructions are complete the cutting sequence may be replayed and checked for errors.
Instructions for cutting ﬂame planed plates and subsequently joining them into panel assemblies and pin heights of jigs for setting up curved shell plates for welding framing and other members to them at the assembly stage can also be determined (see Figure 12.3 ).
This now includes all the hull structural information as well as outﬁtting.
There is, as close as possible, a complete representation of the whole ship.
Planing machines 140 Drilling machines 140 Guillotines 140 Presses 140 Plate rolls 141 Heat-line bending 142 Frame bending 143 Cold frame bending 144 Section pro ﬁ lers 144 Robotics 144
Further reading 146 Some useful websites 146
All rights reserved.
Also, the shipyard may not be located near a steelmaker and may choose to purchase steel from another country if prices are lower.
The stockyard ensures there is always steel to maintain production.
They may also standardize the steel plates used to reduce the need for marshaling.
Steel plates are now stacked horizontally in piles as required.
Lifts are made with magnetic clamps for plates and slings for the sections; the crane capacity can be up to 30 tonnes, to suit the material sizes that the shipyard can process.
A wash system will also remove debris, and in some cases snow or ice.
Plate leveling rolls (mangles)
This can cause distortion, which slows production.
Two sets of rolls may be provided, one for heavy plate and one for light plate, but types are now available that permit a wide range of thicknesses to be straightened.
Shot-blasting Plates and sections are in almost all cases now shot-blasted to remove rust and millscale.
The shot is recovered and recycled.
As it breaks down into smaller pieces, the mix of whole shot and fragments assists the blasting process.
Spent shot and debris is removed for disposal.
The whole process is enclosed.
Following the priming paint stage a drying process may be provided.
The drying also reduces the potential for damage to the primer coating.
Individual machines may have jib cranes mounted on the frame that can be employed to handle the plate during the machining process.
Plate and section part preparation A number of the methods in use for forming plates into the required shapes have been in use for many years.
In the main, cutting is achieved by the use of an oxy-fuel ﬂame or plasma arcs.
Plate pro ﬁ le cutting machines Where a plate is to be cut into one or more (or a series of) complicated shapes, a proﬁling machine is employed.
Provision can also be made for the shrinkage of the plate part as it cools after cutting.
The predicted shrinkage of the plate part is added to the nominal dimensions from the CAD system, so after cooling the part size is correct.
The overall arrangement is shown in Figure 13.1 .
In some cases, 1:1 template or drawing controlled systems may be used.
This can be for small, repetitive parts such as brackets.
Such parts are more usually programmed using a basic CAD system.
A full-size template or drawing may be used to control a cutting machine, and can be useful where a single small item is to be cut in large numbers.
Proﬁlers of this type have a limited application in shipbuilding, but can be
More basic cutting systems are likely to be found in very small shipyards and in ship repair.
This work may be carried out on a planing machine, usually a ﬂame or plasma-arc planer.
One beam carries two burning heads for trimming the plate sides during travel, whilst the other two beams have a single burning head traversing the beam in order to trim the plate ends.
Each burning head may be ﬁtted with triple nozzles and is used to give the required edge preparation.
Drilling machines Some plates or sections may need to have holes drilled in them, for example bolted covers and portable plates.
Drilling machines generally consist of a single drilling head mounted on a radial arm that traverses the drill bed.
This is done at less capital cost, but the press is slower when used for bending and requires greater skill.
Two lower rolls are provided and are made to revolve in the same direction so that the plate is fed between them and a slightly larger diameter top roll that runs idly (see Figure 13.3 ).
Either or both ends of the top roll may be adjusted for height, and the two lower rolls have adjustable centers.
With modern bending rolls, plates up to 45 mm thick may be handled and it is possible to roll plates into a half circle.
This may be done to obtain large mast and derrick post sections for example, or bow thruster tunnel.
Vertical rolls are also available and may be used to roll plates full circle, but can be much more useful for rolling heavy ﬂats used as facing bars on transverses of large tankers, etc. PLATE SWAGING EDGE CURVING PLATE FLANGING OR BENDING PLATE STRAIGHTENING Figure 13.2 Gap presses.
Apply heat Expansion Bend Contraction Single-plane bending Two-plane bending 1 2 4 3 Heat line bending principle Beam applying load PLATE ROLLS Top roller Driven roll Driven roll Plate Figure 13.3 Forming shell plates.
Heat is applied in a line to the surface of a plate by a ﬂame torch, with immediate cooling using air or water.
On cooling, contraction will take place in the direction of the plate surface, causing the plate to become concave on the side to which heat was applied (see Figure 13.3 ).
It is also used where a double curvature is required, for example on bulbous bow plates.
Frame bending The traditional system of bending side frames may still be in use for repair work, and is described as follows.
A ‘set-bar’, which is a ﬂat bar of soft iron, is bent to the scrieve line of the frame on the scrieve board and then taken to the frame bending slabs.
On these solid cast-iron slabs pierced with holes the line of the frame is marked, and modiﬁed to agree with the line of the toe of the frame.
As the heated frame on cooling will tend to bend, the set-bar is sprung to allow for this change in curvature before it is ﬁxed down on the bending slabs by means of ‘dogs’ and pins inserted in the slab holes.
Whilst the set-bar is being ﬁxed the frame section is heated in a long oil-ﬁred furnace adjacent to the bending slabs.
When at the right temperature it is pulled out onto the slabs and ﬁxed with dogs and pins against the set-bar, as quickly as possible.
Once bent, the bar is put aside to cool, but is fastened down to prevent its warping in the vertical direction.
When cold it is checked against the frame line drawn on the slabs.
Meanwhile, the set-bar is turned over and used to bend the corresponding frame for the opposite side of the ship.
Ships with a capacity of over 14,000 TEU.
Few have been built to date.
These ships are too large for any canals.
Their size is typically 5500–8000 TEU though larger ships with over 10,000 TEU capacity have been built.
Panamax ships that can transit the current Panama Canal carry between 3000 and 5000 TEU.
The smallest of these may only carry several hundred TEU.
There is no speciﬁc subclass below Panamax size.
These ships have been phased out under IMO regulations.
Category 3 includes oil tankers of 5000 tonnes deadweight and above but less than the tonnes deadweight speciﬁed for Categories 1 and 2.
Also due to be phased out.
Note: For tankers carrying HGO (heavy gas oil) the lower limits for Categories 2 and 3 fall to 600 tonnes deadweight.
Panama canal limits These are set by lock sizes.
New locks will be larger for ‘New Panamax’ ships (see Table 2.1 ).
Table 2.1 Panama Canal limits Panamax ships New Panamax ships Length (m) 294.13 366 Breadth (m) 32.81 49 Draft (m) 12.04 15.2
The frames are progressively bent by application of a horizontal ram whilst the frame is held by gripping levers ( Figure 13.4 ).
Any type of rolled section can be bent in some machines with a limitation on the size of section.
The inverse curve is marked onto the straight frame and the frame bent until the inverse curve becomes straight on the curved frame (see Figure 13.4 ).
Prior to cutting, the stiffening member can be moved through a marking cell where part identiﬁcation and, where required, bending lines for inverse curve frame bending (see Figure 13.4 ) can be marked.
Thus, the robot carries on working whilst new programs are produced for it.
Figure 13.4 Frame bending.
This is claimed to reduce preprogramming times to zero and no CAD models are required.
www.tts-marine.com See production systems.
Joining ship sections a ﬂ oat 158 Further reading 159 Some useful websites 159 Historically, ships were constructed on a slipway piece by piece.
During the Second World War a large number of merchant and war ships were required to be built in a short period of time.
During the 1950s there was an increase in ship size and the greater quantity of steel required for the structures of these ships was a major driver for the adoption of units.
All rights reserved.
What is termed ‘green’ material was left on the unit edges, typically around 20 mm.
The unit was then lifted into place and cut to ﬁt the structure, which had already been erected.
This provides a saving in man-hours and time.
Figure 14.1 shows a typical side block for a single hull bulk carrier.
When the ﬁrst large tankers were built, typical units were around 50 tonnes.
As the ships grew in size they also grew in complexity and outﬁtting began to be a bottleneck.
The traditional approach of completing and launching the hull prior to outﬁtting in a basin or at a quay had to be modiﬁed.
Figure 14.2 shows a pipe module which could be ﬁtted onto a steel block, or lifted directly into the ship during construction.
There Wing tank/ deck unit Side shell panel assembly Hopper side unit Part transverse bulkhead panel Figure 14.1 Bulk carrier single shell side block unit.
Floor plate level Tank top level Figure 14.2 Pipe module.
Block : An assembly of two or more units into a bottom or side block, weighing up to 200 tonnes.
Subassemblies When plates and sections have been machined (cut, bent, beveled, etc.)
Minor subassemblies such as deep frames consisting of web and welded face ﬂat are also attached at this stage.
Curved shell plates are placed on jigs and welded, and the various stiffening members can be aligned and welded in a similar manner to those on a ﬂat panel assembly.
Panel assemblies used in the block may
well have dimensions restricted by the plate length that can be handled at the machining stage and this can subsequently inﬂuence block length.
Each unit should be designed for maximum downhand welding but may have to be turned for this purpose.
Also, outﬁt modules can be installed into the blocks.
Figure 14.3 Assembly unit outﬁtted on both sides.
Suez canal limits There are no locks and ship size is limited by the canal dimensions.
With no locks the ship length is also unrestricted.
The maximum draft is 20 meters.
The Saint Lawrence Seaway links the North American Great Lakes to the Atlantic.
The limits for ships based on the locks are length 226 m, breadth 24 m, and draft 7.92 m. Some useful websites www.pancanal.com/eng/general
Unit erection When any panel and the block assemblies are complete there will be some time buffer before their erection at the building berth, building dock, or within the building hall to Figure 14.4 Cabin/toilet module.
For an established medium-sized yard with building berth or hall having modest craneage, typical erection sequences for a general cargo ship, a large double-hull oil tanker, and bulk carrier are shown in Figures 14.5, 14.6, and 14.7 respectively.
The block assemblies for the bulk carrier are shown in Figure 14.8 .
Double bottom port 7.
Tween deck sides 2.
Double bottom stbd.
Tween deck center 3.
Transverse bulkhead 9.
Main deck sides 4 & 5.
Side shell 10.
Main deck center 6.
Bilge plates 11.
Main deck hatch Figure 14.5
Bilge unit 4.
Double-hull side unit 6.
Deck/side unit 7.
Center deck unit 8.
Deck units Figure 14.6 An erection sequence for a large double-hull tanker.
Lower bulkhead unit 3.
Upper bulkhead panel 4 & 5.
Side block incorporating shell, tanks and part bulkhead 6.
Deck between hatches 7.
Hatch coaming Figure 14.7 An erection sequence for a dry cargo bulk carrier.
No. 3 hatch No. 2 hatch
longitudinals, stiffeners, etc. may be left unwelded across unit seams and butts until these are completed in a similar manner to that described in Chapter 10.
A number of large shipbuilding ﬁrms building the super tankers, large chemical carriers, bulk carriers, etc. may assemble much larger ‘mega-blocks’ that can be the full width of the ship.
These are transported to the building berth or a building dock, lifted into place and joined.
This is not a very efﬁcient process and is adopted as an expedient only.
One method adopted is that where a cofferdam is arranged in way of the joint, a caisson is brought up against the ship’s hull, and the cofferdam and caisson are pumped dry.
Once the spaces are dried out, welding of the complete joint may be undertaken, the resulting weld being X-rayed to test the soundness of such a critical joint.
On completion of the paint scheme in way of the joint the caisson is removed.
A similar method makes use of a rubber ‘U’ form ring rather than a caisson, which needs modiﬁcation for each ship size.
If a dry dock is available the sections may be aligned aﬂoat and even welded above the waterline, the rest of the joint or the complete joint being secured by strongbacks.
Surveyor , Fall 2005 edition.
The site includes a ‘virtual tour’ of the shipyard.
Further reading 172 Some useful websites 172
This chapter identiﬁes the various means of transferring a ship from the land on which it is constructed to the water.
End launching is now less common as most newer shipyards have a building dock.
Other methods are less common and include side launching, a ship lift, a ﬂoating dock, or a pontoon.
There is also a danger of damage to propellers and rudders as the ship leaves the end of the slipway.
All rights reserved.
End launches On release of a holding mechanism the launching cradle with the ship slides down the ground ways under the action of gravity.
When the stern has entered the water the vessel is partly supported by buoyancy and partly by the ground ways.
As the vessel travels further into the water the buoyancy becomes sufﬁcient to lift the stern.
The vessel then pivots about the forward poppets, i.e. the fore end of the launching cradle.
During building the keel blocks take the greater part of the weight, the remainder being carried by shores and, where used, bilge blocks.
Keel blocks are arranged so that the height of keel above the ground is 1.25– 1.5 m, giving reasonable access, but not too high so that a large amount of packing is required (see Figure 15.1 ).
At the bow the height of the keel must be sufﬁcient to allow the ship’s forefoot to dip the required amount without striking the ground during pivoting when the stern lifts at launch.
To transfer the ship from the building blocks to the launching cradle, the commonest practice is to drive wedges into the launching cradle.
This lifts the ship and permits the removal of the keel and bilge blocks together with the shores.
One type is the sand box, which contains sand to a depth of 80–100 mm held in a steel frame located between two of the wooden blocks.
This steel frame may be removed and the sand allowed to run out.
Another type is a wooden block sawn diagonally, the two halves being bolted so that they collapse on removal of the bolts.
REINFORCED BERTH Bilge blocks Shore Space for launching ways Keel blocks Shore Concrete Space for launching ways Bilge blocks Figure 15.1 Building blocks.
Launching ways and cradle The ﬁxed ground ways or standing ways on which the cradle and ship slide may be straight or have a fore and aft camber.
Transversely the ground ways are normally laid straight but can be canted inwards to suit the ship’s rise of ﬂoor.
Usually, the ground ways have a small uniform fore and aft camber, say 1 in 400, the ways being the arc of a circle of large radius.
As a result a greater buoyancy for the same travel of the ship beyond the way ends is obtained, which will reduce the way end pressures.
Generally two ground ways are ﬁtted, the distance between the ways being about one-third the beam of the ship.
Some large ships have been launched on as many as four ways, and in Germany and the Netherlands it is common practice to launch vessels on a single center-line ground way.
The width of the ways should be such that the launching weight of the ship does not produce pressures exceeding about 20 tonnes per square meter.
Ground ways are laid on supporting blocks and extend down to the low water mark so that they are covered by at least 1 meter of water at high tide.
To guide the sliding ways as they move over the ground ways, a ribband may be ﬁtted to the outer edge of the ground ways.
This could be ﬁtted to the inner edge of the sliding ways, but when ﬁtted to the ground ways has the advantage that it aids retention of the lubricating grease.
It is therefore designed to carry a load of this magnitude, but there is a danger in the ﬁne-lined vessel of the forward poppets being forced outwards by the downward force, i.e. the bow might break through the poppets.
In addition, saddle plates taken under the forefoot of the ship with packing between them and the shell may be ﬁtted to transmit the load to the fore poppets and hence ground ways.
Here short plate brackets may be
3 Development of ship types Chapter Outline Dry cargo ships 17 Container ships 21 Barge-carrying ships 21 Ro-ro ships 21 Hull form 23 Cargo handling equipment 23 Bulk carriers 23 Car carriers 26 Oil tankers 26 Passenger ships 30 Further reading 33 A breakdown into broad working groups of the various types that the shipbuilder or ship designer might be concerned with are shown in Figure 3.1 .
Dry cargo ships If the development of the dry cargo ship from the time of introduction of steam propulsion is considered, the pattern of change is similar to that shown in Figure 3.2 .
A number of designs at that time also combined bridge and poop, and a few combined bridge and forecastle, so that a single well was formed.
Raised quarter decks were often associated with smaller deadweight carrying vessels, e.g. colliers.
All rights reserved.
temporarily welded between the shell plating and heavy plate wedge rider, as illustrated in Figure 15.2 .
To do this the slope of the ways under the vessel’s center of gravity must exceed the lubricant’s coefﬁcient of friction.
Formerly, melted tallow was applied to the ways, allowed to harden, and then covered with a coat of soft soap.
To prevent the petroleum-based grease from soaking into the sliding ways, a base coat may be applied to them.
Standing ways that extend into the water may be dried out at low tide prior to the launch and the base coat and grease applied.
Releasing arrangements Small ships may be released by knocking away a diagonal dog-shore (see Figure 15.3 ) ﬁtted between the sliding and standing ways.
In most cases, however, triggers are used to release the ship.
The hydraulic trigger is less easily installed and less safe.
A number of triggers will be ﬁtted depending on the size of the vessel to be launched; in the case of the 75,000-tonne bulk carrier for which a launching sequence is given below, six triggers were ﬁtted for the launch.
These triggers are in effect a simple system of levers that allow the large loads acting down the ways to be balanced by a small load on the releasing gear.
FORE POPPET FOR SHIP WITH FULL FORWARD SECTIONS Plate bracket Plate ribband Ramming up wedges Make up Ground way Sliding way BRACKET IN WAY OF FRAMING Plate ribband Packing Sliding way Ground way Make up Ground way Sliding way Ribband Wedge Ribband Ribband Wood truss Bracket FORE POPPET FOR SHIP WITH FINE LINES FORWARD Figure 15.2 Launching ways—fore poppet.
Sliding way Ground way 2nd lever Solenoid release unit Slip shackle 1st lever 3rd lever Load Anvil Figure 15.3 Release arrangements for ship launch.
Launching sequence As a guide to the procedure leading up to the launch, the following example is given for the launch of a 75,000-tonne bulk carrier.
The launch ways have been built up as the ship is erected from aft; the ways have been greased and the cradle erected.
Four days before launch a start is made on ramming up the launch blocks, i.e. driving in the wedges ( Figure 15.2 ) to raise ship off the building blocks.
This is done by a dozen or so men using a long ramming pole, a gang working either side of the ship.
Two days before the launch a start is made on removing the shores.
On the morning of the launch everything is removed up to the high water mark and tumbler shores are put in aft.
These are inclined shores that fall away as the ship starts to move.
Every second keel block is then removed and the vessel is allowed to settle.
An evenly distributed number of keel blocks are then taken out so that only about 20 keel blocks are left supporting the ship.
Half an hour before the launch the last remaining keel blocks are removed.
The bilge blocks are then removed.
The full ship’s weight comes on the triggers at the time planned for the launch.
There are a number of methods available for doing this, one or more being employed at most ship launches.
Each chain drag is laid in the form of a horseshoe with its rounded portion away from the water, so that as the ship moves down the ways the forward portion of the drag is pulled through the remainder of the pile.
This prevents any excessive shock load in the chain, which would occur if the pile of chain were to be suddenly accelerated to the speed of the ship.
The wire rope drag lines are attached to temporary pads on the side of the ship, and supported by rope tricing lines as they are led slightly forward and then aft along the ship’s sides.
Each drag line is then led forward and shackled to the chain drag (see Figure 15.4 ).
As the ship is released and moves aft the tricing lines are broken in turn, the work done absorbing some of the ship’s energy.
To further increase the resistance to motion of the ship, wooden masks may be ﬁtted at the stern of the ship.
The mask is made as large as possible but located low down to present a ﬂat surface to the water in the direction of motion.
Masks are often
Welded pads Tricing lines Wire lines Cradle ELEVATION MASKS SECTION AFT LOOKING FOR’D Mask of wooden slats Way end PLAN Chain drags SLEWING ARRANGEMENTS Wire Figure 15.4 Arresting arrangements at launch.
constructed of horizontal pieces of wood with spaces left between each piece to increase the resistance.
Chain drags, weights, or anchors may be placed in the water to one side of the building berth for this purpose.
These are then made fast to the stern of the ship with drag lines of a predetermined length.
Side launching is usually restricted to small ships, typically no more that around 100 meters in length.
The ground ways are arranged transversely, i.e. at right angles to the line of keel.
Packing again forms the cradle with tie pieces between the groups of sliding ways.
One of the features of side launching is the drop where the ground ways are not extended into the water; consequently, large angles of heel occur when the vessel strikes the water.
In a building dock it is also possible to construct two ships at the same time.
The ﬁrst ship can then be ﬂoated out of the dock while the second remains in the dry.
Once the dock is dewatered the second ship can be moved to the seaward end and a third ship started.
In some shipyards conventional berths are ﬁtted at the river or sea end with what is virtually a pair of dock gates.
In many instances it also permits higher tides over the way ends when the gates are opened for a launch.
The ship can be built with the gate closed, maintaining a dry working environment.
When the gate is opened the lower part of the slipway ﬂoods and provides sufﬁcient water depth for the launch to be carried out successfully.
Rail systems are incorporated into the building hall and lead out to the open ship lift.
Ship lifts basically consist of a series of transverse beams, each supported by wires or chains suspended from a winch on each side.
A platform is also supported by the beams to provide access when the ship is lifted clear of the water.
The lift can also be used to recover a ship from the water for repair.
Originally, ship lifts were used for ﬂeets of small ships, for example in ﬁshing ports, but have increased in size for large commercial repairs and some construction.
The largest lift is able to lift over 20,000 tonnes.
The arrangement is similar to a ship lift, with rails to allow the completed ship to be transferred onto the dock.
Marine railways A few small shipyards use a slipway with a set or rails that extend into the water.
As with the ship lift, a marine railway can also be used to recover ships for repair.
Further reading Dunn, Kennedy, and Tibbs, Launching in the 21st century.
Some useful websites http://www.royalhaskoning.co.uk The company is a designer of dry docks worldwide.
http://www.fsg-ship.de/ The Flensberg shipyard site, includes webcams and video.
Today, only small vessels such as tugs, ferries, and cargo ships of less than 500 gross tonnage have a single-bottom construction.
Larger ocean-going vessels are ﬁtted with some form of double bottom.
Keels At the center line of the bottom structure is located the keel, which is often said to form the backbone of the ship.
The commonest form of keel is that known as the ‘ﬂat plate’ keel, and this is ﬁtted in the majority of ocean-going and other vessels (see Figure 16.1 a).
A form of keel found on smaller vessels is the bar keel ( Figure 16.1 b).
The bar keel may be ﬁtted in trawlers, tugs, etc. and is also found in smaller ferries.
All rights reserved.
Ships Middle strake of tank top (a) FLAT PLATE KEEL Flat keel plate Continuous center girder (b) BAR KEEL Garboard strake of bottom shell Bar keel Drain hole Solid floor Flange Ships (c) DUCT KEEL Solid floor Ships Stiffener Side girder Piping Stiffener Solid floor Figure 16.1 Keels.
Trawlers purse seiners etc.
Cross-channel ferries Coastal ferries Harbor ferries Figure 3.1 Ship types.
Duct keels ( Figure 16.1 c) are provided in the double bottoms of some vessels.
The piping is then accessible when cargo is loaded, an entrance to the duct being provided at the forward end of the engine room.
No duct is required aft of the engine room as the piping may be carried in the shaft tunnel.
Awidth of not more than 2.0 m is allowed for the duct, and strengthening is provided at the tank top and keel plate to maintain continuity of strength of the transverse ﬂoors.
A center-line girder is ﬁtted and one side girder is ﬁtted each side of the center line where the beam is less than 10 m. Where the beam is between 10 and 17 m, two side girders are ﬁtted and if any bottom shell panel has a width-to-length ratio greater than 4 additional continuous or intercostal stiffeners are ﬁtted.
It may be deeper to give the required capacities of oil fuel, fresh water, and water ballast to be carried in the bottom.
Garboard strake Bar keel Figure 16.2 Single-bottom construction.
It is not uncommon, however, for it to be extended to the ship’s side, and individual bilge wells are then provided for drainage purposes (see Chapter 26).
It may therefore be heavier than the other strakes of inner bottom plating.
If grabs are used for discharging from general cargo ships the plate thickness is further increased, or a double ceiling is ﬁtted.
At the ends of bottom tank spaces and under the main bulkheads, watertight or oiltight plate ﬂoors are provided.
These are made watertight or oiltight by closing any holes in the plate ﬂoor and welding collars around any members that pass through the ﬂoors.
Also, small air and drain holes may be drilled at the top and bottom respectively of the solid plate ﬂoors in the tank spaces.
The spacing of the solid plate ﬂoors varies according to the loads supported and local stresses experienced.
At intermediate frame spaces between the solid plate ﬂoors, ‘bracket ﬂoors’ are ﬁtted.
The bracket ﬂoor consists simply of short transverse plate brackets ﬁtted in way of the center girder and tank sides (see Figures 16.4 and 16.5 ).
Transversely framed double bottom If the double bottom is transversely framed, then transverse solid plate ﬂoors, and bracket ﬂoors with transverse frames, provide the principal support for the inner bottom and bottom shell plating ( Figure 16.4 ).
Solid plate ﬂoors are ﬁtted at every frame space in the engine room and in the pounding region (see the end of this chapter).
Where a ship is regularly discharged by grabs, solid plate ﬂoors are also ﬁtted at each frame.
Elsewhere, the solid plate ﬂoors may be spaced up to 3.0 m apart, with bracket ﬂoors at frame spaces between the solid ﬂoors.
The plate brackets of bracket ﬂoors are ﬂanged and their breadth is at least 75% of the depth of the center girder at the bracket ﬂoors.
To reduce the span of the frames, which should not exceed 2.5 meters, at the bracket ﬂoor, vertical angle or channel bar struts may be ﬁtted.
One intercostal side girder is provided port and starboard where the ship’s breadth exceeds 10 m but does not exceed 20 m, and two are ﬁtted port and starboard where the ship’s breadth is greater.
In way of the bracket ﬂoors a vertical welded ﬂat stiffener is attached to the side girder.
They are also ﬁtted under boiler seats, transverse bulkheads, and the toes of stiffener brackets on deep tank bulkheads.
At intermediate frame spaces brackets are ﬁtted at the tank side and at the center girder, where they may be up to 1.25 m apart.
One intercostal side girder is ﬁtted port and starboard if the ship’s breadth exceeds 14 m, and where the breadth exceeds 21 m two are ﬁtted port and starboard.
These side girders always extend as far forward and aft as possible.
Where the double bottom is transversely framed, solid plate ﬂoors are ﬁtted at every frame space in the pounding region.
Where the minimum designed draft forward may be more than 4% but less than 4.5% of the ship’s length, solid plate ﬂoors may be ﬁtted at every third frame space and intercostal side girders may have a maximum spacing of four times the transverse ﬂoor spacing.
Greater slamming forces (i.e. pounding) are experienced when the ship is in the lighter ballast condition, and is long and slender, by reason of the increased submersion of the bow in heavy weather with impact also on the bow ﬂare.
A closer spacing of solid plate ﬂoors is required, the maximum spacing being 2.5 m, and also additional intercostal side girders are provided, the spacing not exceeding 3.7 m (see Figure 16.6 ).
Testing double-bottom compartments Each compartment is tested on completion with a head of water representing the maximum pressure head that may be experienced in service, i.e. to the top of the air pipe.
The air pressure may be raised to 0.21 kg/cm 2 and then lowered to a test pressure of 0.14 kg/cm 2 .
Any suspect joints are then subjected to a soapy liquid solution test.
By ﬁtting a raised quarter deck in way of the after holds this tendency was eliminated.
A raised quarter deck does not have the full height of a tween deck, above the upper deck.
3 2 1 Machinery RAISED QUARTER DECK Raised quarter deck Machinery 4 3 2 1 Deep tank 4 Shaft Tunnel 3 2 1 Machinery AWNING OR SPAR DECK Awning deck Machinery 4 3 5 2 1 Deep tank ALL AFT CARGO SHIP 4 Shaft Tunnel 3 2 1 Machinery Tonnage hatch Tonnage openings OPEN SHELTER DECK THREE ISLAND TYPE 4 Shaft Tunnel 3 2 1 Machinery 4 Shaft Tunnel 3 2 1 Machinery COMBINED POOP AND BRIDGE Figure 3.2 Development of cargo ship.
To this end, resilient mounting and ﬂexible couplings are now common in such ships.
17 Shell plating and framing Chapter Outline Shell plating 189 Bottom shell plating 189 Side shell plating 190 Grades of steel for shell plates 191
Some useful websites 205
Shell plating The bottom and side shell plating consists of a series of ﬂat and curved steel plates generally of greater length than breadth butt welded together.
The vertical welded joints are referred to as ‘butts’ and the horizontal welded joints as ‘seams’ (see Figure 17.1 ).
Framing is notched in way of welded plate butts and seams.
Bottom shell plating Throughout the length of the ship the width and thickness of the keel plate remain constant where a ﬂat plate keel is ﬁtted.
Its thickness is never less than that of the adjoining bottom plating.
Strakes of bottom plating to the bilges have their greatest thickness over the 40% of the ship’s length amidships, where the bending stresses are highest.
All rights reserved.
There is also a thickness increase at the stern frame connection, at any shaft brackets, and in way of the hawse pipes, where considerable chaﬁng occurs.
Further shell plate thickness increases may be found at the panting region, as discussed later in this chapter.
The upper strake of plating adjacent to the strength deck is referred to as the ‘sheerstrake’.
As the sheerstrake is at a large distance from the neutral axis it has a greater thickness than the other strakes of side shell plating.
The upper edge is dressed smooth, and the welding of bulwarks to the edge of the sheerstrake is not permitted within the amidships length of the ship.
The connection between the sheerstrake and strength deck can present a problem, and a rounded gunwale may be adopted to solve this problem where the plating is heavy.
This is often the case over the midship portion of large tankers and bulk carriers.
The radius of a rounded gunwale must be adequate (not less than 15 times the thickness) and any welded guardrails and fairleads are kept off the radiused plate if possible.
25mm Rad notch cut in frame in way of seam Welded seam One frame space Frame Welded butt Welded butt Figure 17.1 Shell plating.
All openings in the side shell have rounded corners, and openings for sea inlets etc. are kept clear of the bilge radius if possible.
Grades of steel for shell plates In large ships it is necessary to arrange strakes of steel with greater notch ductility at the more highly stressed regions.
Details of Lloyd’s requirements for mild steel and over 40% of the length amidships are given in Table 17.1 as a guide.
The rules also require thicker plating for the members referred to in Table 17.1 outside the amidships region to have greater notch ductility.
Smaller single-skin bulk carriers Table 17.1 Lloyd’s requirements for mild steel Requirement Structural member 1.
Grade D where thickness is less than 15 mm, otherwise Grade E. Sheerstrake or rounded gunwale over 40% of length amidships in ships exceeding 250 m in length.
Grade A where thickness is less than 15 mm.
Grade B where thickness is 15–20 mm.
Grade D where thickness is 20–25 mm.
Grade E where thickness is greater than 25 mm. Sheerstrake and rounded gunwale over 40% of length amidships in ships of 250 m or less in length.
Bilge strake (other than for vessels of less than 150 m with double bottom over full breadth).
Grade A where thickness is less than 20 mm.
Grade B where thickness is 20–25 mm.
Grade D where thickness is 25–40 mm.
Grade E where thickness is over 40 mm.
Bilge strake (ships of less than 150 m and with double bottom over full breadth).
Grade A where thickness is less than 30 mm.
Grade B where thickness is 30–40 mm.
Grade D where thickness is greater than 40 mm.
then have transverse frames at the side shell ﬁtted between the hopper and topside tank (see Figure 17.7 ).
Transverse framing In a general cargo ship the transverse framing will consist of main and hold frames with brackets top and bottom, and lighter tween deck frames with brackets at the tops only (see Figure 17.2 ).
A typical midship section for a general cargo ship is shown in Figure 17.6 .
Deck beam Tween frame Deck beam Hold frame Web frame Tank side bracket Beam knee Figure 17.2 Side shell with transverse framing.
In way of tanks such as oil bunkers or cargo deep tanks the side frame size will be increased, except where supporting side stringers are ﬁtted within the tank space.
Web frames, i.e. built-up frames consisting of plate web and face ﬂat, where the web is considerably deeper than the conventional transverse frame, are often introduced along the side shell (see Figure 17.3 a).
In the tween decks above the after peak tank, web frames are required at every fourth frame space abaft the aft peak bulkhead.
In all cases the provision of web frames is intended to increase the rigidity of the transverse ship section at that point.
Transverse webs are ﬁtted to support the side longitudinals, these being spaced not more than 3.8 m apart, in ships of 100 m length or less, with increasing spacing being permitted for longer ships.
In the peaks the spacing is 2.5 m where the length of ship is less than 100 m, increasing linearly to a spacing of 3.5 m where the length exceeds 300 m. Larger ships required to have a double hull are longitudinally framed at the sides with transverse webs arranged in line with the ﬂoors in the double bottom to ensure continuity of transverse strength.
Horizontal perforated ﬂats are ﬁtted between the inner and outer side plating to support the transverse webs (see Figures 17.8 and 17.9 ).
A roll on roll off (ro-ro) ship midship section is shown in Figure 17.10 .
Avery different ship type is shown in Figure 17.11 , that is a catamaran fast ferry.
Tank side brackets The lower end of the frame may be connected to the tank top or hopper side tank by means of a ﬂanged or edge-stiffened tank side bracket, as illustrated in Figure 17.3 b.
Stiffener Solid floor Solid floor Solid floor Tank side bracket Stiffener Lightening hole Hold frame Tank top Hold frame (b) TANK SIDE BRACKETS OR CONNECTIONS Tank top Flat stiffener 200mm flat facing bar (a) WEB FRAME 750 mm Deck transverse Tween frame Tween deck Deck longitudinals Web plate Solid floor Tank side bracket Margin plate Hold frame Flange Flange Figure 17.3 Web frame and tank side bracket.
Local strengthening of shell plating The major region in which the shell plating is subjected to local forces at sea is at the forward end.
Strengthening of the forward bottom shell for pounding forces is dealt with in Chapter 16.
These ‘panting beams’ are connected to the frames by brackets and if long may be supported at the ship’s center line by a partial wash bulkhead.
Intermediate frames are bracketed to the stringer (see Figure 17.4 ).
Side stringers spaced vertically about 2 m apart and supported by web frames.
Perforated ﬂats spaced not more than 2.5 m apart.
These stringers may be omitted if the shell plating thickness is increased by 15% for vessels of 150 m length or less, decreasing linearly to a 5% increase for vessels of 215 m length or more.
Stringers usually take the form of a web plate with ﬂat facing bar.
In tween deck spaces in the forward 15% of the ship’s length, intermediate panting stringers are ﬁtted where the unsupported length of tween frame exceeds 2.6 m in lower tween decks or 3 m in upper tween decks.
In the aft peak space and in deep tween decks above the aft peak similar panting arrangements are required for transverse framing, except that the vertical spacing of panting stringers may be up to 2.5 m apart.
A main ice belt zone is deﬁned that extends above the ice load waterline (i.e. normally the summer load waterline) and below the ice light waterline (i.e. lightest waterline ship navigates ice in).
The extent of this zone depends on the ice class assigned.
For the more severe ice conditions the thickness of the side shell is also increased below the main ice belt zone for at least 40% of the length from forward.
Transverse main and intermediate frames of heavier scantlings are ﬁtted in way of the main ice belt zone.
Bilge keel Most ships are ﬁtted with some form of bilge keel, the prime function of which is to help damp the rolling motion of the vessel.
Cracks have originated in the bilge keel and propagated into the bilge plate causing failure of the main structure.
At a later date, what were known as open/closed shelter deck ships were developed.
A vessel having a ‘modiﬁed tonnage’ had tonnage measured to the second deck only, i.e. the tween deck was exempt, but the tonnage mark was not to be submerged.
When the tonnage mark was submerged, tonnage was taken as that to the upper deck, the freeboard being a minimum measured from the upper deck.
That is, there are say three or four holds forward and one aft of the machinery space.
a continuous ground bar with the butt welds in the shell plating, ground bar, and bilge keel staggered (see Figure 17.5 ).
Direct connection between the ground bar butt welds and the bilge plate and bilge keel butt welds and the ground bar are avoided.
In ships over 65 m in length, holes are drilled in the bilge keel butt welds as shown in Figure 17.5 .
Connection of the ground bar to the shell is by continuous ﬁllet welds and the bilge keel is connected to the ground bar by light continuous or staggered intermittent weld.
The latter lighter weld ensures that should the bilge keel be fouled, failure occurs at this joint without the bilge plate being damaged.
Bilge keels are gradually tapered (at least 3 to 1) at their ends and ﬁnish in way of an internal stiffening member.
Bilge keel ending Shell butt 25 mm dia hole Bilge keel butt Ground bar butt Frame Molded line of bottom shell Bilge plate Molded line of side shell Figure 17.5 Bilge keels.
Ceiling Keel plate 1800 mm
Deck plating (21.25 mm) Tank side bracket Inner bottom longitudinals 200 mm
× 10.5 mm O.B.P. Bottom longitudinals 200 mm × 13.75 mm O.B.P. Bilge ceiling Middle line strake 12.75 mm Corrugated bulkhead Side plating (16.5 mm) Side frame 340 mm × 17.25 mm O.B.P. Length B.P. 132.5 m Beam mid. 18.42 m Depth mid. 11.75
m Deck transverse 300 mm deep with 237.5 mm flange Tween deck plating (9.5 mm) Corrugated bulkhead Deck transverse 300 mm deep with 200 mm flange Knee Ship’s Upper deck longitudinals (150 mm ×  75 mm × 15 mm) Sheerstrake (210 mm × 20 mm) grade ‘E’ Tripping bracket Stringer plate (20 mm)
10mm Knee Cargo battens Figure 17.6
Figure 17.7 Bulk carrier—single-side skin midship section.
Pipe duct c L Tank top Stringer 1 Stringer 2 Stringer 3 Upper deck Pipe duct Transverse frames 280 × 11 OBP spaced 800 mm Web frames – spacing 2400 mm below stringer 1 4800 mm above stringer 1 Solid floors at 1200 mm spacing Length overall 180 m Breadth molded 30 m Draft molded 9.75 m
Deadweight 34,000 tonnes Hatch 1700 mm Figure 17.8 Bulk carrier—double-side skin midship section.
DECK TH SIDE SHELL 10.5
D 2 ND .
Depth mid. 12.81 m VEHICLE DECK TRAIN DECK
mm L Figure 17.10 Midship section of ro-ro ship.
Bridging structure Length O.A. 44.0 M Beam O.A. 12.0 M Material—Aluminum Alloy Tunnel plating Bottom plating Waterline Main deck Side plating Fender extrusion Transverse Deck beam Floor Figure 17.11 High speed craft (catamaran)—section.
Some useful websites www.iacs.org.uk Copies of the IACS’s Common Structural Rules for Bulk Carriers are available on this website.
This chapter deals with the internal vertical structure of the ship.
All rights reserved.
As a rule the strength of the transverse watertight bulkheads is maintained to the strength deck, which may be above the freeboard deck.
Neither should it be too far aft so that the compartment ﬂooded forward causes excessive trim by the bow.
Classiﬁcation societies require the location for ships whose length does not exceed 200 m as not less than 5% and not greater than 8% of the ship’s length (Lloyd’s length) from the fore end of the load waterline.
A minimum distance of 10 meters may also be speciﬁed to ensure that the bulkhead is effective.
As a rule this bulkhead is ﬁtted at the minimum distance in order to gain the maximum length for cargo stowage.
It is located well aft so that the peak when ﬂooded would not cause excessive trim by the stern.
Table 18.1 indicates the number of watertight bulkheads recommended by Lloyd’s Register for any cargo ship.
In container ships the spacing is arranged to suit the standard length of containers carried.
The narrow deck width outboard of the hatch opening forms the crown of a double shell space containing wing ballast tanks and passageways (see Figure 17.9).
These may have hatch covers on the forward holds only, or none at all, and are provided with substantial stripping pumps for removing rain and green water from the holds.
The largest ships are those operated by Maersk, which can carry a reported 13,500 TEU.
These are unusual and most large ships are between with one classiﬁcation society reporting more than 60 vessels of at least 8000 TEU classed (see Figure 3.3 b).
Other designs make provision for ﬂoating the barges in and out of the carrying ship, which can be ballasted to accommodate them.
Ro-ro ships These ships are characterized by the stern and in some cases the bow or side doors giving access to a vehicle deck above the waterline but below the upper deck (see Figure 3.3 a).
Access within the ship may be provided in the form of ramps or lifts leading from this vehicle deck to upper decks or hold below.
Cargo is carried in vehicles and trailers or in unitized form loaded by fork-lift and other trucks.
In order to permit the drive-through vehicle deck
Smaller bulkheads may be erected as a single unit; larger bulkheads are in two or more units.
always been the practice to use horizontal strakes of plating since the plate thickness increases with depth below the top of the bulkhead.
The reason for this is that the plate thickness is directly related to the pressure exerted by the head of water when a compartment on one side of the bulkhead is ﬂooded.
At the lower end of transverse hold bulkheads in bulk carriers a bulkhead stool is generally ﬁtted (see Figure 18.3 ) at the lower end of the bulkhead.
The boundaries of the bulkhead are double continuously ﬁllet welded directly to the shell, decks, and tank top.
At the line of the tween decks a ‘shelf plate’ is ﬁtted to the bulkhead and when erected the tween decks land on this plate, which extends 300–400 mm from the bulkhead.
The deck is lap welded to the shelf plate with an overlap of about 25 mm.
In the case of a corrugated bulkhead it becomes necessary to ﬁt ﬁlling pieces between the troughs in way of the shelf plate.
Watertight floor Upper deck Tween deck Welded seam Welded seam Welded seam Welded seam
Figure 18.1 Plain watertight bulkhead.
All bulkheads, unless they form the boundaries of a tank that is regularly subject to a head of liquid, are hose tested.
Where a doorway is cut in the lower part of a watertight bulkhead care must be taken to maintain the strength of the bulkhead.
The opening is to be framed and reinforced if the vertical stiffeners are cut in way of the opening.
The actual opening is kept as small as possible, the access to the shaft tunnel being about 1000–1250 mm high and about 700 mm wide.
A swinging hinged type of door could prove impossible to close in the event of ﬂooding and is not permitted.
Vertical sliding doors may be closed by a vertical screw thread, which is turned by a shaft extending above the bulkhead and ﬁtted with a crank handle.
This screw thread turns in a gunmetal nut attached to the top of the door, and a crank handle is also provided at the door to allow it to be closed from this position.
The horizontal sliding door may also be opened and closed by a hydraulic ram with a hydraulic hand pump and with control at the door and above the bulkhead deck (see Figure 18.4 ).
When in place all watertight doors are given a hose test, but those in a passenger ship are required to be tested under a head of water extending to the bulkhead deck.
These may be similar to the weathertight doors ﬁtted in superstructures, but are to have gunmetal pins in the hinges.
However, in modern cargo ships they may need to be
Door control valve Door opening Door Hand pump operated from both sides of door Hydraulic cylinder Figure 18.4 Watertight doors.
They must be bracketed or welded to some other form of stiffening member at their ends.
This is to reduce the free surface effect.
This tunnel carries the bilge piping as it is undesirable to pass this through the deep tanks carrying oil cargoes.
Testing deep tanks Deep tanks are tested by subjecting them to the maximum head of water to which they might be subject in service (i.e. to the top of the air pipe).
COVER Stiffener L L Figure 18.5 Construction of deep tanks.
Topside tanks Standard general bulk carriers are ﬁtted with topside tanks that may be used for water ballast, and in some instances are used for the carriage of light grains.
The thickness of the sloping bulkhead of this tank is determined in a similar manner to that of the deep tank bulkheads.
Transverses are arranged in line with the end of the main cargo hatchways, and in large ships a fore and aft diaphragm may be ﬁtted at half the width of the tank, between the deck and the sloping plating.
The tunnel should be large enough to permit access for inspection and repair of the shafting.
The additional space under this tunnel ﬂat is often used to stow the spare tail shaft.
Under hatchways the top plating must be increased in thickness unless it is covered by wood of a speciﬁed thickness.
On completion the shaft tunnel structure is subject to a hose test.
At intervals along the length of the shaft, stools are built that support the shaft bearings.
A walkway is installed on one side of the shaft to permit inspection and, as a result, in a single screw ship the shaft tunnel will be offset from the ship’s center line.
This walkway is formed by gratings laid on angle bearers supported by struts etc.; any piping is then led along underneath the walkway.
1 Basic design of the ship Chapter Outline Preparation of the design 3 Information provided by design 4 Purchase of a new vessel 6 Ship contracts 7
Further reading 8 Some useful websites 9
This is especially the case for some trades, for example LNG, where the ship is expected to work the same route for its working life.
For other ships, including bulk carriers, the ﬁrst cost of the ship is the major factor for the owner and the ship may be designed for ease of production.
All rights reserved.
Main deck Upper deck Ramps ER Hold Lift Tween Angled stern ramp Stern door ER Vessel has adjustable internal ramp giving access to decks Weather deck Main deck Hold Figure 3.3 (a) Roll-on roll-off ships.
(b) 7700 TEU container ship.
Escape trunk Aft peak bulkhead No. 5 hold tunnel flat Tunnel recess Shaft tunnel No. 4 hold Machinery space shaft ELEVATION IN WAY OF SHAFT
TUNNEL Heavier top plating Weld Weld Bracket Ship’s Welded stiffener Shaft Grating Support Piping Shaft Weld Grating Weld Stool supporting shaft bearings Welded stiffener Heavier top plating Double bottom Ship’s L Figure 18.6 Shaft tunnels.
This latter type of pillar may also be found in tank spaces where the crown of tank under pressure can put the pillar in tension.
These run from the forward or aft side of the hatch opening to the adjacent transverse bulkhead on the ship’s center line.
If this is not possible stiffening arrangements should be made to carry the load from the tween pillar to the hold pillar below.
For economic reasons the sections are fabricated in lengths from steel plate, and for the hollow rectangular section welded channels or angles may also be used (see Figure 18.7 ).
A small ﬂat bar or cope bar may be tack welded inside these pillar sections to allow them to be welded externally.
Stiffening under Figure 18.8 Small solid pillars.
Pillars have a bearing ﬁt, and it is important that the loads at the head and heel of the pillar should be well distributed.
At the head of the pillar a continuous weld is made to a doubling plate supported by brackets.
Details of the head ﬁtting vary from ship to ship and depend very much on the form of hatch side or deck girder that they support.
Where this is not possible partial ﬂoors and short intercostal side girders may be ﬁtted to distribute the load.
Machinery space pillars are fabricated from angles, channels, or rolled steel joists, and are heavily bracketed to suitably stiffened members ( Figure 18.7 ).
These may have forged palms at their head and heel, the head being welded to a continuous angle fore and aft runner that supports the deck.
The heel is then directly welded to the deck, which is suitably stiffened below (see Figure 18.8 ).
Some useful websites www.iacs.org.uk Copies of the IACS’s Common Structural Rules for Bulk Carriers are available on this website.
19 Decks, hatches, and superstructures Chapter Outline Decks 226 Deck plating 226 Deck stiffening 229 Hatches 229 Hatch coamings 232
Although all decks contribute to some extent to the strength of the ship, the most important is that which forms the upper ﬂange of the main hull girder, called the ‘strength deck’.
In general cargo ships these lighter decks form tweens that provide spaces in which goods may be stowed without their being crushed by a large amount of other cargo stowed above them.
All rights reserved.
Forward and aft on the uppermost continuous deck a forecastle and often a poop may be provided to protect the ends of the ship at sea.
The weather decks of ships are cambered to facilitate the draining of water from the decks in heavy weather.
Short lengths of internal deck or ﬂats are as a rule horizontal.
Deck plating The heaviest deck plating will be found abreast the hatch openings of the strength deck.
Other thickness increases may occur where large deck loads are carried, where fork-lift trucks or other wheeled vehicles are to be used, and in way of deep tanks.
The stringer plate (i.e. the strake of deck plating adjacent to the sheerstrake) of the strength deck, over the midship region and container ship cargo hold area, of ships less than 260 meters in length, is to be of Grade B steel if 15–20 mm thick, Grade D if 20–25 mm thick, and Grade E if more than 25 mm thick.
Where the steel deck temperatures fall below 0  C in refrigerated cargo ships the steel will be of Grades B, D, and E depending on thickness.
On decks other than the strength deck, the variation in plate thickness is similar, but lighter scantlings are in use.
decreased within deckhouses, if sheathed.
Before ﬁtting any form of sheathing the deck is treated to prevent corrosion between the deck plating and sheathing (see Figure 19.2 ).
Any openings abreast the hatch openings in a deck are kept to a minimum and clear of the hatch corners.
Deck transverses support the longitudinals, and these are built from a deep web plate with ﬂange or welded face ﬂat, and are bracketed to the side frame ( Figure 19.1 ).
Transversely framed decks are ﬁtted with deck beams at every frame, and these have scantlings that are dependent on their span, spacing, and location in the ship.
Within the forward 7.5% of the ship’s length these deck girders are more closely spaced on the forecastle and weather decks.
Each beam is connected to the frame by a ‘beam knee’ and abreast the hatches ‘half beams’ are ﬁtted with a suitable supporting connection at the hatch side girder (see Figure 19.3 ).
Both longitudinals and deck beam scantlings are increased in way of cargo decks where fork-lift trucks and other wheeled vehicles, which cause large point loads, are used.
In way of the hatches fore and aft side girders are ﬁtted to support the inboard ends of the half beams and transverses.
At the ends of the hatches heavy transverse beams are ﬁtted and these may be connected at the intersection with the hatch side girder by horizontal gusset plates ( Figure 19.4 ).
Where the deck plating extends inside the coamings of hatches amidships the side coaming is extended in the form of tapered brackets.
Hull form Between the 1940s and 1970 there was a steady increase in the speed of the dry cargo ship and this was reﬂected in the hull form of the vessels.
These provide further increased rates of loading and discharge.
Stud welded bolt Wood sheathing bedded in white lead or other composition Deck plating Wood plug Deck plating Tapered plank House side Deck plating Side plating 300mm waterway 50mm welded flat bar Caulked seam Figure 19.3 Deck construction.
Deep hatch end beam (or transverse) Gusset plate (see detail)
Hatch side girder Deck Hatch coaming Deck Hatch coaming For’d Aft Radius Figure 19.4 Hatch openings.
If used, then the ship has an increased Type B freeboard, i.e. there is a draft penalty.
Position 1 indicates that the hatch is on the exposed freeboard deck, raised quarter deck, or superstructure decks within 25% of the ship’s length from forward.
Position 2 indicates that the hatch is located on exposed superstructure decks abaft the forward 25% of the ship’s length.
Hatches that are at Position 1 have coamings at least 600 mm high and those at Position 2 have coamings at least 450 mm high, the height being measured above any deck covering.
Where the coaming height is 600 mm or more the upper edge is stiffened by a horizontal bulb ﬂat and supporting stays to the deck are ﬁtted.
Coamings less than 600 mm high are stiffened by a cope or similar bar at their upper edge.
The steel coamings extend down to the lower edge of the deck beams, which are then effectively attached to the coamings ( Figure 19.4 ).
These patent covers vary in type, the principal ones being fore and aft single pull, folding, piggy-back, pontoon, and side rolling.
Each panel wheel is permanently engaged on a ﬁxed chain located along each hatch side coaming.
PULL HATCH COVERS (c) DIRECT PULL HATCH COVERS
Figure 19.5 Hatch covers—1.
end coaming at the ship’s center line, driving endless chains running along the full length of the hatch side coaming port and starboard and connected to the leading panel.
Figure 19.6 Hatch covers—2.
Pontoon covers are commonly used on container ships, being lifted by the ships’ or shore cranes with the container spreader.
The gasket and cleat arrangements will vary with the type of cover.
Each pontoon section may span the full hatch width, and cover perhaps one-quarter of the hatch length.
Where portable beams are ﬁtted wood or stiffened steel plate covers may be used.
The beams sit in sockets at the hatch coamings and the covers are protected by at least two tarpaulins.
At the coaming the tarpaulins are made fast by battens and wedges ﬁtted in cleats, and the sections of the cover are held down by locked bars or other securing arrangements (see Figure 19.7 ).
Freeing ports are cut in bulwarks, forming wells on decks in order that water may quickly drain away.
The required area of freeing ports is in accordance with the Load Line Convention requirement (see Chapter 31).
The bulwark consists of a vertical plate stiffened at its top by a strong rail section (often a bulb angle or plate) and is supported by stays from the deck ( Figure 19.7 ).
On the forecastle of ships assigned B-100 and B-60 freeboards the stays are more closely
Figure 19.7 Bulwark detail and hatch with portable beams and wood covers.
Where the bulwark is cut for any reason, the corners are well rounded and compensation is also provided.
The crew may be located all aft in the poop structure or partly housed in any bridge structure with the navigating spaces.
All bridge superstructures and midship deckhouses will have a heavily plated bridge front, and the aft end plating will be lighter than the front and sides.
Likewise the stiffening members ﬁtted at the forward end will have greater scantlings than those at the sides and aft end.
Additional stiffening in the form of web frames or partial bulkheads will be found where there are large erections above the bridge deck.
At this major discontinuity, the upper deck sheerstrake thickness is increased by 20%, the upper deck stringer plate by 20%, and the bridge side plating by 25%.
The latter plating is tapered into the upper deck sheerstrake with a generous radius, as shown in Figure 19.8 a, stiffened at its upper edge, and supported by webs not more than 1.5 m apart.
Where deckhouses are built above the poop deck these are supported by webs or short transverse bulkheads in the same manner as those houses ﬁtted amidships.
The after end of any poop house will have increased scantlings since it is more exposed than other aft end house bulkheads.
Greater than 15% of length Clip Clip Clip Clip Clip Clip House side House side Plate webs Bulwark Bulwark stay Door Bridge front Door Rubber gasket DOOR SECTION HINGE DETAIL ELEVATION
AT END OF LONG BRIDGE PLAN
AT UPPER DECK DETAIL OF DOOR CLIP (b) WEATHERTIGHT DOOR
Hinge Hinge Rubber gasket Rubber gasket Bridge deck Bridge front Radiused plate with stiffened edge Handle Flat stiffener Bridge plating + 25% thickness Deck stringer + 20% thickness Sheerstrake + 20% thickness (a) LONG BRIDGE Figure 19.8 Effective superstructure connection and weathertight door.
A series of turret-deck steamers were built for ore-carrying purposes between 1904 and 1910; a section through such a vessel is illustrated in Figure 3.4 a. Since 1945 a substantial number of ocean-going ore carriers have been built of uniform design.
This form of ore carrier with a double bottom and side ballast tanks ﬁrst appeared in 1917, only at that time the side tanks did not extend to the full hold depth (see Figure 3.4 b).
The latter ship type carried oil in the wing tanks, as shown in Figure 3.4 c, and had a passageway for crew protection in order to obtain the deeper draft permitted tankers.
The common general bulk carrier that predominated in the latter half of the twentieth century took the form shown in Figure 3.4 d with double bottom, hopper sides, and deck wing tanks.
These latter tanks have been used for the carriage of light grain cargoes as well as water ballast.
Another type, shown in Figure 3.4 f, had alternate holds of short length.
The size of this type of ship has also steadily increased and the largest bulk carriers have reached 365,000 tonnes deadweight.
The ﬂooding resulted either in excessive hull bending stresses or excessive trim, and loss of the ship.
Some older ships have been ﬁtted with expansion joints that are in effect transverse cuts introduced to relieve the hull bending stresses in the houses.
Access openings must be provided to the houses and weathertight doors are ﬁtted to these openings.
These must comply with the requirements of the Load Line Convention (see Chapter 31) and are steel doors that may be secured and made watertight from either side.
Weathertightness is maintained by a rubber gasket at the frame of the door (see Figure 19.8 b).
www.tts-marine.com Hatch cover types and details.
An overall view of the fore end structure is shown in Figures 20.1 and 20.2 , and it can be seen that the panting stiffening arrangements are of particular importance.
All rights reserved.
Stiffener Breast hook Solid round stem bar STEM SECTIONS
Panting stringer Panting beam PLAN OF STRINGER I Wash plate Fo’c’sle deck Deep girder Upper deck Pillar Deep floors
Chain locker Pillar Deck girder Girder FORE PEAK TANK Pillar Stringer III Breast hook Stringer II Stringer I Solid round stem bar Breast hook Pillar Panting beam Stiffener ELEVATION AT SHIP’S CENTER LINE WASH PLATE WASH PLATE MUD BOX WASH PLATE Figure 20.1 Fore end construction.
The solid round bar is welded inside the keel plate at its lower end, and inside the radiused stem plate at its upper end, the shell being welded each side ( Figure 20.1 ).
It is necessary to support that part of the stem that is formed by radiused plates with ‘breast hooks’, i.e. horizontal plate webs, between the decks and below the lowest deck, in order to reduce the unsupported span of the stem.
Chain locker Bulkhead stiffeners Stem bar Panting beams Plate stem Wash bulkhead
Figure 20.2 Fore end structure.
From the construction point of view the bulbous bow does not present any great difﬁculty if this aspect has been considered when the bulb form is designed.
Floors are ﬁtted at every frame space in the bulb, and a center line wash bulkhead is introduced when the bulb is large.
Transverses are ﬁtted at about every ﬁfth frame in long bulbs (see Figure 20.3 ).
Smaller bulbs have a center-line web but not a wash bulkhead; and in all bulbous bows horizontal diaphragm plates are ﬁtted.
Chain locker A chain locker is often arranged in the position forward of the collision bulkhead shown in Figure 20.1 , below either the main deck or the second deck.
It can also be ﬁtted in the forecastle or aft of the collision bulkhead, in which case it must be watertight and have proper means of drainage.
Port and starboard cables are stowed separately in the locker, and the inboard ends of each are secured to the bottom of the center-line bulkhead or underside of deck (see Figure 20.4 ).
It is desirable to have an arrangement for slipping the cable from outside the chain locker.
A false bottom may be formed by perforated plates on bearers arranged at a height above the ﬂoor of the locker.
Where ﬁtted this provides a mudbox that can be cleaned and is drained by a center-line suction, the bottom plating sloping inboard.
Access to the bottom of the locker is provided by means of foot holes cut in the bulkhead, and the stiffeners ﬁtted to this bulkhead are of the vertical ﬂush cope bar type.
Each cable is fed to the appropriate locker compartment through port and starboard chain pipes from the forecastle deck.
These chain pipes or spurling pipes are of tubular construction with castings or other rounded end moldings to prevent chaﬁng.
Ships SECTION AT TRANSVERSE Fo’c’sle deck Breast hooks Pillar Upp. deck Deck girder Pillar Transverse Crown of fore peak tank Stringer Web Stringer No
. 4 stringer No. 2 stringer No. 1 stringer FORE PEAK Fore peak bulkhead Non W.T. flat Transverse Transverse Breast hooks STRINGER No.3 stringer STRINGER L Figure 20.3 Bulbous bow.
Figure 20.4 Chain locker construction.
d k. H atch Chain or spurling pipe Windloss Hawse pipe Foc’s’le deck Figure 20.5 Hawse pipes.
Hawse pipes To provide an easy lead for the cable from the windlass to the anchors, the hawse pipes must be carefully ﬁtted.
Today this can be achieved with the CAD hull model.
Tubular hawse pipes are generally fabricated, and castings are welded at the shell and deck to prevent chaﬁng (see Figure 20.5 ).
Additional stiffening in way of the hawse pipes is required at the side shell.
They are also to be found in large ships and cross-channel vessels where they are provided as an aid to docking.
Thrust provided by the impellers is low; 16 tonnes is perhaps the largest ﬁtted, but the unit size does not need to be large as small thrusts are very effective.
It is true, however, that the greatest thrust is provided at zero speed and as the vessel gets under way the unit becomes much less effective.
It has been shown that an appreciable increase in hull resistance and hence power may result if this detail is neglected.
Some useful websites www.brunvoll.no For details of tunnel and azimuth bow thrust units.
The cruiser stern (see Figure 21.1 ) was for many years the favored stern type for ocean-going ships, but today most of these vessels have a transom stern (see Figure 21.2 ).
Both the shape of the stern and the rudder type will dictate the form of the stern frame, and this will be further inﬂuenced by the required propeller size.
Where more than one screw propeller is to provide the thrust required to propel the ship, bossings or ‘A’ Ship Construction.
All rights reserved.
‘x’ Cant beam Cant beam Cant beam PLAN
PLAN AT RUDDER TRUNK Floor Floor Floor Floor Ship’s Inspection manhole TRANSOM STERN LOOKING FOR’D Centre-line bulkhead (corrugated) Figure 21.2 Transom stern.
brackets will be ﬁtted to support the outboard shafts.
Water jets, for example, are now a common feature on high-speed passenger and service craft.
Solid ﬂoors are ﬁtted at every frame space, and a heavy center-line girder is ﬁtted right aft at the shell and decks.
The stern plating is stiffened by cant frames or webs with short cant beams supporting the decks and led to the adjacent heavy transverse deck beam.
Cant frames are not required where the transom stern is adopted, as the ﬂat stern plating may be stiffened with vertical stiffeners ( Figure 21.2 ).
Deep ﬂoors and a center-line girder are provided at the lower region of the transom stern construction.
Panting arrangements at the aft end are dealt with in Chapter 17.
Stern frame It has already been indicated that the form of the stern frame is inﬂuenced by the stern proﬁle and rudder type.
The stern frame of a ship may be cast, forged, or fabricated from steel plate and sections.
To ease the casting problem with larger stern frames and also the transport problem, it may be cast in more than one piece and then welded together when erected in the shipyard.
Fabricated stern frames are often produced by the shipyard itself, plates and bars being welded together to produce a form similar to that obtained by casting (see Figure 21.3 ).
Sternpost sections are of a streamline form, in order to prevent eddies being formed behind the posts, which can lead to an increase in the hull resistance.
Welded joints in cast steel sections will need careful preparation and preheat.
Figure 21.3 Stern frames.
The rudder post is carried up into the main hull and connected to the transom ﬂoor, which has an increased plate thickness.
Also, the propeller post may be extended into the hull and connected to a deep ﬂoor, the lower sole piece being carried forward and connected to the keel plate.
Side shell plates are directly welded to the stern frame ( Figure 21.3 ), a ‘rabbet’, i.e. a recess, sometimes being provided to allow the shell plate to ﬁt ﬂush with the sternpost section.
Rudders Many of the rudders that are found on present-day ships are semi-balanced, i.e. they have a small proportion of their lateral area forward of the turning axis (less than 20%).
Two common forms of rudder are shown in Figure 21.4 , each being associated with one of the stern frames shown in Figure 21.3 .
The other plate, often called the ‘closing plate’, is then welded to the internal framing from the exterior only.
This may be achieved by welding ﬂat bars to the webs prior to ﬁtting the closing plate, and then slot welding the plate as shown in Figure 21.4 .
Other rudders may have a cast frame and webs with welded side and closing plates, which are also shown in Figure 21.4 .
The rudder is tested when complete under a head of water 2.45 m above the top of the rudder.
Rudder pintles Pintles on which the rudder turns in the gudgeons have a taper on the radius, and a bearing length that exceeds the diameter.
Rudder stock Rudder stock may be of cast or forged steel, and its meter is determined in accordance with the torque and any bending moment it is to withstand.
This coupling enables the rudder to be lifted from the pintles for inspection and service.
Rudder bearing The weight of the rudder may be carried partly by the lower pintle and partly by a rudder bearer within the hull.
In some rudder types, for example the spade type that is only supported within the hull, the full weight is borne by the bearer.
A rudder bearer may incorporate the watertight gland ﬁtted at the upper end of the rudder trunk, as shown in Figure 21.5 .
Rudder trunk Rudder stocks are carried in the rudder trunk, which as a rule is not made watertight at its lower end, but a watertight gland is ﬁtted at the top of the trunk where the stock enters the intact hull ( Figure 21.5 ).
This trunk is kept reasonably short so that the stock has a minimum unsupported length, and may be constructed of plates welded in a box form with the transom ﬂoor forming its forward end.
The other type is closed at both ends and has metal bearing surfaces lubricated by oil.
In the former type the bearings were traditionally lignum vitae strips and the tail shaft (aft section of propeller shaft) was ﬁtted with a brass liner.
Both types of sterntube are illustrated in Figure 21.6 .
Shaft bossing and ‘ A ’ brackets Twin-screw or multi-screw vessels have propeller shafts that leave the line of shell at some distance forward of the stern.
Bossings are a common feature on the larger multiple-screw passenger ships and are in effect a molding of the shell that takes in the line of shaft
Sterntube Shaft Stern tube nut Stern frame Composite or lignum vitae strips Tailshaft sheathed with liner Packing Oil header tank Gunmetal liner Sterntube Sterntube Aft peak bulkhead Stern frame Oil feed holes Oil seal D 3D 2D D D D D 2 3 4 Tailshaft Pump Oil outlet Locking nut Gunmetal liner Oil seal Oil vent Oil supply White metal bearing Hand pump Oil drain Aft peak bulkhead W.T. gland Sea water cock (seawater tube)
Retaining ring SECTION IN WAY OF BEARING STRIPS Figure 21.6 Sterntubes.
These amendments entered into force on 1 July 2006.
The midship section of a Handysize bulk carrier with double-skin construction is shown in Figure 17.8.
Whilst most deck spacing is to suit cars, some tween deck heights may be greater and the deck strengthened to permit loading of higher and heavier vehicles.
The spacing of ﬁxed car decks can vary from 1.85 to 2.3 meters to accommodate varying shapes and heights of cars.
Transfer arrangements for vehicles from the main deck are by means of hoistable ramps, which can be lifted and lowered whilst bearing the vehicles.
Loading and discharging vehicles onto and off the ship is via a large quarter ramp at the stern and a side shell or stern ramp.
A unit is an overall stowage area of 8.5 square meters per car and represents a vehicle 4.125 meters in length and 1.55 meters wide plus an all-round stowage margin.
Access from inside the hull is thus provided to the shaft over a great proportion of its length, and it is afforded greater protection.
Many large liners having high speeds are shown to have beneﬁtted by a decrease in resistance when bossings have been ﬁtted rather than ‘A’ brackets.
The arms carrying the shafts extend from this section, which may be split in two or more parts in some instances to aid alignment when it is erected (see Figure 21.7 ).
Although on smaller vessels the upper palms may simply be welded to a reinforcing pad at the shell, on larger vessels the upper ends of the struts enter the main hull and are connected to a heavy ﬂoor with additional local stiffening ( Figure 21.7 ).
The bore of the propeller boss is tapered to ﬁt the tail shaft and the propeller may be keyed onto this shaft; a large locking nut is then ﬁtted to secure the propeller on the shaft.
This ‘pilgrim nut’ may also be used with keyless bore propellers.
A fairing cone is provided to cover the securing nut.
lap Plate CAST SPECTACLE FRAME SECTION LOOKING AFT Floor Stringer Strut Floor Ship’s ‘A’ – BRACKET Propeller shaft FRAME IN WAY OF BOSSING Inserted frame Casting bolted at center line PLAN Floor Plate bossing Horizontal web Web frame Figure 21.7 Bossings and ‘A’ brackets.
Shrouded propellers To increase the thrust provided by a propeller of given diameter at low speeds and high slips it may be enclosed in a ﬁxed nozzle.
Single-screw tugs and trawlers are often ﬁtted with the ﬁxed patent ‘Kort nozzle’ where under a heavy tow the propeller is working at a high slip.
When running freely the slip is much lower, and it might appear that there was little advantage in ﬁtting a shrouded propeller.
The inner plating of the nozzle has a heavier ‘shroud’ plate in way of the propeller tips and this is carried some distance fore and aft of this position.
At this diameter the nozzle section has two full ring webs and a half-depth ring web supporting the inner and outer plating.
The advantages of electric podded propulsors are: 1.
The hull form can be designed for minimum resistance.
Flare plating Leading edge bar Trailing edge bar Cone plating Ring web Fore and Aft w s eb TRANSVERSE SECTION FORE AND AFT SECTION AT CENTER LINE Ring webs Shroud plating in way of propeller Flare platin g Shroud plating in wa y of propelle r Figure 21.8 Propeller nozzle.
Each of these podded propulsors has a 6-meter-diameter four-bladed propeller.
For each podded propulsor a seating is welded into the ship’s bottom structure to distribute the loads from the pod over a wide area of the hull.
The ﬁxed propulsors are bolted directly to their seating whilst the steering units are carried by a slewing ring in their seatings.
Power from the ship’s main machinery space is transferred to the motors in the steering pods via a slipring unit.
Queen Mary 2: Genesis of a Queen , The Royal Institution of Naval Architects, 2004.
The machinery is aft, and an expansion trunk, if ﬁtted, is on the center line in way of the tank spaces (see Figure 22.1 ).
There are those ships that carry reﬁned oil Ship Construction.
All rights reserved.
Trunk plating (11 mm) Flat stiffener Stiffener 175 mm × 8.5 mm Frame space clear of transverse Stringer Deck and trunk longitudinals 200 mm × 12.5 mm 175 mm
× 8.5 mm Bracket Stringer Longitudinal bulkhead Deck plating (11 mm) Sheerstrake 1500 mm × 12.5 mm Side shell (10.5 mm) Stringer Frame space in way of transverse Bottom plating (11 mm)
Bottom longitudinals 250 mm × 12 mm Keel plate 1075 mm × 16.5 mm Bracket Docking bracket Side frame Transverse Figure 22.1 Midship section of coastal tanker of less than 5000 tonnes deadweight with trunk.
products, and perhaps some other cargoes like molasses, which tend to be in the smaller 12,000–50,000 tonnes deadweight range.
Then there are the crude oil carriers that extend to the 500,000 tonnes deadweight range.
The protective location of these tanks had the effect of providing full or partial double bottoms and/or side tanks in way of the cargo tank space.
Mild steel As with dry cargo ships it is a requirement that Grade B, D, and E steels be used for the heavier plating of the main hull strength members where the greatest stresses arise in tankers.
Grade E plates, which we have equated with the ‘crack arrester strake’ concept (see Chapter 8), will be seen to be required over the midship region in ships exceeding 250 meters in length and are also required as shown in Table 22.1 .
Higher tensile steel Higher tensile steels are often used for the deck and bottom regions of the larger tankers, Grades DH and EH being used for the heavier plating.
The extent of this plating and section material is indicated in Figure 22.2 .
Length B.P Beam mld.
315 m 58 m 30.4 m Plate bracket Inner bottom Intermediate stringer WING TANK Longitudinal bulkhead Inner hull Floor 3.5 m 3 m ‘DH’ ‘EH’ ‘DH’ ‘DH’ ‘EH’ ‘EH’ ‘EH’ ‘DH’ ‘EH’ Figure 22.2 Double-hull oil tanker.
framed side shell, inner hull, and longitudinal bulkheads are all supported by transverse webs aligned with the transverse ﬂoors and deck transverses (see Figure 22.3 ).
At the side shell the upper longitudinals have the least scantlings, and a uniform increase in size occurs down the side shell until the bilge is reached.
The bilge longitudinal size then approaches that of the bottom shell.
For products carriers the deck longitudinals may be ﬁtted above the deck to provide a ﬂush internal tank surface for cleaning (see Figure 22.4 ).
The longitudinals can be offset bulb plates that may be built up to give the required scantling on large ships.
In way of the center tank a bracketed deck transverse supports the deck longitudinals and large plate brackets are ﬁtted between the longitudinal bulkheads and inner bottom (see Figure 22.2 ).
Within the double-hull side space they form a solid web and are supported by horizontal stringers (see Figure 22.2 ).
In the wing tank space they support the deck longitudinals and fore and aft bulkhead longitudinals, and in turn are supported by a mid-height longitudinal plate stringer (see Figure 22.2 ).
De ck Deck centre girder Flat stiffener Flat stiffener Flat stiffener Transverse Transverse Docking bracket Docking bracket Docking bracket Flat stiffeners Flat stiffener F la t s tiff e n e r Flat stiff ener Transverse Transverse O. T. transverse bulkhead Centre lin e bulkhead web O. T. transverse bulkhead ELEVATION AT CENTRE LINE OF TANK Longtl.
Tankers with two or more longitudinal bulkheads may have wing and center tank lengths up to 20% of the ship’s length.
Cofferdams, which may be formed with two adjacent oiltight transverse bulkheads at least 760 mm apart, are required at the ends of the cargo space.
Corrugated longitudinal bulkheads are only permitted in ships of less than 200 m in length.
Hatchways Oiltight hatchways provide access to the tank spaces at the exposed deck.
The openings for these are kept as small as possible, and the corners are well rounded, circular openings being not uncommon.
Coamings provided for the openings should be of steel and at least 600 mm high, and suitably fastened steel or other approved material covers are ﬁtted.
Other openings are provided in the deck for ullage plugs and tank cleaning, these being on the open deck, and not within enclosed deck spaces.
Testing tanks Each cargo tank and cofferdam may be tested separately when complete by ﬁlling the tank with water to a head 2.45 m above the highest point of the tank excluding the hatchways, and by ﬁlling the cofferdam to the top of the hatch.
Water is then transferred to the empty tanks, and the remainder of the bottom and side shell is inspected.
In practice, a combination of a structural water test and air leak test is often used.
The air leak test is carried out on the building berth, the tanks being subject to an air pressure similar to that required for testing double-bottom tanks.
Awater pressure test is carried out on one center tank and two wing tanks selected by the surveyors.
Clean water ballast tanks are tested in the same manner as the cargo tanks, but bunkers and deep tank test requirements are similar to those in dry cargo ships, i.e. a head of water 2.45 m above the crown of the tank is applied.
Any bulkhead not forming a tank boundary is hose tested.
Fore end structure Forward of the tank space deep tanks may be ﬁtted.
If longitudinal bulkheads are ﬁtted port and starboard in the cargo tanks, these may be extended to the fore side of the deep tank in lieu of a center-line bulkhead.
Where the depth of the tank exceeds 16 m the side transverses, and the web frames in a transversely framed tank, either have one or more deep stringers ﬁtted, cross ties, or perforated ﬂats with deep beams in way of the transverses or webs.
breadth of tank exceeds 70% of the ship’s beam, at least one solid bulkhead on the center line is recommended.
If the forepeak is longitudinally framed the side transverses have a maximum spacing of between 2.5 and 3.5 m depending on the length of ship, and are connected to transverses arranged under the decks in line with the side transverses.
These include several 20,000 tonne deadweight ice-breaking oil tankers.
Transverse or longitudinal side and deck framing may be adopted in way of the engine room and aft of this space.
If transversely framed, web frames are ﬁtted not more than ﬁve frame spaces apart below the lowest deck and may be supported by side stringers.
Transverse webs have the same spacing as web frames except in tween decks above the aft peak, where the maximum spacing is four frame spaces.
The aft peak and stern construction follows that of other merchant ship types, a center-line bulkhead being provided in the aft peak.
Any ice strengthening is similar to that required in other ships (see Chapter 17).
Particular attention must be paid to any endings in the midship length of the hull.
A typical FSU is of 100,000 tons deadweight with a storage capacity of 112,000 cubic meters representing 10 days production.
Crude oil from a ﬂoating production unit (FPU) is transferred to the FSU, where it is loaded via a submerged turret loading (STL) system.
From the FSU the crude oil is transferred to shore by shuttle tankers, which are loaded by ﬂexible hoses from the stern of the FSU.
An FPSO combines the functions of the FPU and FSU in a single ﬂoating unit.
Many oil tankers, more recently those with a single hull that are barred from some trades, have been converted to FPSOs and FSUs, but there are also numbers of new design and build contracts for such vessels.
Note: Tank stiffening above deck Figure 22.4 Oil products/chemical tanker of 12,700 tonnes deadweight.
For some cargoes tanks constructed of stainless steel are preferred.
Under the IBC Code chemical tankers are designed and constructed to one of three speciﬁed standards.
Type 2 and 3 ships carry products of progressively lesser hazards.
The IBC Code also deﬁnes cargo tank types.
Tank type 2 is an integral tank, i.e. it is part of the ship’s hull structure.
A gravity tank (G) is an independent or integral tank that has a design pressure of not more than 0.7 bar gage at the top of the tank.
A pressure tank (P) is an independent tank that has a design pressure of more than 0.7 bar gage.
Figure 22.4 shows a 130 m LOA type II oil products/chemical tanker of 12,700 tonnes deadweight.
The 130 meter length overall by 20 meter breadth by 9.75 meter depth vessel has 12 cargo tanks, equipped to carry six different types or grades of cargo simultaneously.
Each tank has a deepwell pump rated at 300 cubic meters per hour and the ship’s maximum discharge rate is 1800 cubic meters per hour with six lines working at the same time.
Common Structural Rules For Double Hull Oil Tankers .
www.iacs.org.uk See ‘Common structural rules for double hull oil tankers’.
Some useful websites 289
A large number of ships are in service that are designed to carry gases in liquid form in bulk.
LPG is used as Ship Construction.
All rights reserved.
a clean fuel for domestic and industrial purposes.
Lique ﬁ ed natural gas (LNG) LNG is natural gas from which most of the impurities such as sulfur and carbon dioxide have been removed.
Methane has a critical pressure of 45.6 kg/cm 2 at a critical temperature of  82.5  C, i.e. the pressure and temperature above which liquiﬁcation cannot occur, so that methane can only be liqueﬁed by pressure at very low temperatures.
The IMO international gas carrier code In 1975 the Ninth Assembly of the IMO adopted the Code for the Construction and Equipment of Ships Carrying Liqueﬁed Gases in Bulk, A.328 (IX), which provides international standards for ships that transport liqueﬁed gases in bulk.
Integral tanks These tanks form a structural part of the ship’s hull and are inﬂuenced in the same manner and by the same loads that stress the adjacent hull structure.
Figure 3.6 a was constructed, the expansion trunk and double bottom within the cargo space having been eliminated much earlier.
The greatest changes in that period were the growth in ship size and nature of the structure (see Figure 3.6 b).
The growth in size of ocean-going vessels from 1880 to the end of the Second World War was gradual, the average deadweight rising from 1500 tonnes to about 12,000 tonnes.
Since then the average deadweight increased rapidly to about 20,000 tonnes in 1953 and about 30,000 tonnes in 1959.
Today there are aﬂoat tankers ranging from 100,000 to 500,000 tonnes deadweight.
It should be made clear that the larger size of vessel is the crude oil carrier, and fuel oil carriers tend to remain within the smaller deadweights.
Service speeds of oil tankers have shown an increase since the late 1940s, going from 12 to 17 knots.
Little Length 77.6 m Beam Depth 5.8 m Deadweight 1680 tonnes Speed 10 k Expansion trunk Wing tank Center tank Wing tank Double bottom (a) Length B.P. 330 m Beam 53.3 m Depth 32 m
Deadweight 332,000 tonnes Speed 14½ k Center tank tank tank Wing Wing (b) DOUBLE-HULL TANKER SBT SBT SBT SBT SBT SBT SBT Center tank tank tank Wing Wing MID-DECK TANKER PRINCIPLE SBT SBT Oil Oil Oil Oil Mid-deck 10.4 m Figure 3.6 Oil tankers.
Membrane tanks are primarily used for LNG cargoes (see Figure 23.4 ).
Such tanks were developed for the carriage of LNG, but have been used for a few LPG ships.
LPG at or near atmospheric pressure or LNG may be carried in such tanks (see Figure 23.2 ).
The overall design concept of these tanks is based on the so-called ‘crack detection before failure principle’, which permits their use with a reduced secondary barrier (see Figure 23.3 ).
LNG is normally carried in such tanks.
The liners on their own do not act as liquid barriers and therefore differ from membranes.
Figure 23.1 shows the three types discussed below.
Wash bulkheads are ﬁtted in very long tanks.
and are designed for a maximum pressure of about 8 kg/cm 2 .
Antiﬂotation chocks are provided to prevent the tank ﬂoating off the bearings if the hold were ﬂooded.
Those types that have been or are more commonly found in service are described below.
At the beginning of 2011, some 350 large LNG ships were trading; older ships have independent Type B tanks of the Kvaerner-Moss design with most being of the membrane type.
FULLY PRESSURIZED LPG CARRIER 73,200 cu.m.
FULLY REFRIGERATED LPG CARRIER 5200 cu.m.
No 2 tank No 1 tank Figure 23.1 Liqueﬁed gas carriers.
Midship section 1 2 3 9 8 7 4 5 6 PLAN AT SECOND DECK 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Machinery Fore peak F.O. tanks Nitrogen tank Cargo tanks W.B. PROFILE PVC foam seal between balsa panels Aluminum cargo tank Plywood faced balsa panels Glass fiber
Inert space Timber furring strip Steel section Glass fiber Steel inner hull Figure 23.2 Liquid methane carrier.
Tanks consist of either an aluminum alloy or 9% nickel steel sphere welded to a vertical cylindrical skirt of the same material, which is its only connection to the hull (see Figure 23.3 ).
The sphere expands and contracts freely all movements being compensated for in the top half of the skirt.
The outer surface of the sphere and part of the skirt is covered with a polyurethane foam insulation.
The system is ﬁtted with a partial secondary barrier consisting of a drip tray under the tank and splash shields at the sides.
Above deck the spheres are protected by substantial weather covers.
The Invar sheet membrane used is only 0.5–0.7 mm thick, which makes for a very light structure.
Insulation consists of plywood boxes ﬁlled with perlite (see Figure 23.4 ).
Speciﬁc gravity of LPG cargoes can vary from 0.58 to 0.97, whilst LNG ships are often designed for a cargo speciﬁc gravity of 0.5 so that a characteristic of LNG ships in particular and most LPG ships is their low draft and high freeboards.
Fore end and aft end structure is similar to that for other ships.
All gas ships have spaces around the tanks that are monitored for gas leaks and in many ships these spaces are also inerted, an inert gas system being ﬁtted aboard the ship.
Liquid gas cargoes are carried under positive pressure at all times so that no air can enter the tanks and create a ﬂammable mixture.
bulk in integral or membrane tanks, or ‘100A1 liqueﬁed gas carrier’ where the vessel is designed to carry liqueﬁed gases in bulk in independent tanks.
Further reading Code for the Construction and Equipment of Ships Carrying Liqueﬁed Gases in Bulk .
Ffooks R: Natural Gas by Sea: The Development of a New Technology , ed 2. 1993, Witherby & Co. Ltd.
Further reading 305 Some useful websites 305
The past several decades have seen many changes in cargoes and thus in cargo handing.
All rights reserved.
The subsequent public outcry led to the United States Congress passing the Oil Pollution Act 1990 (OPA 90).
This unilateral action by the United States government made it a requirement that existing single-hull oil tankers operating in United States waters were to be phased out by an early date, after which all oil tankers were to have a double hull (see Figures 3.6 and 22.2 ).
The cargo tank space (see Figure 3.6 ) had a structural deck running its full length at about 0.25–0.5 the depth from the bottom, which ensures that should the bottom be ruptured the upward pressure exerted by the sea would prevent most of the oil from escaping into the sea.
Those with segregated ballast tanks with protective location were to be phased out by July 2021.
Heavy-duty cranes can have lifting capacities from 25 to 50 tonnes when using a cargo grab and have an outreach up to 36 meters.
The bulk carrier cranes may also be used for lifting hatch covers if these are not of the sliding or side rolling types.
Figure 24.1 shows in section the arrangement of one of three 30-tonne safe working load (SWL) wire lufﬁng cranes ﬁtted to one side of a 70,000-tonne deadweight bulk carrier.
This crane installation allows the ship to transsport cargoes outside draft restricted ports, the three cranes in this instance being capable of handling somewhat more than 10,000 tonnes in a 24-hour period.
Typically, two or three cranes per ship are provided with lifting capacities in the range of 36–45 tonnes, with outreaches between 26 and 40 m. With ship cranes, cargo spotting may easily account for as much as 40% of total crane cycle time, especially when slotting unit loads.
These cranes may also be used for handling pontoon hatch covers and are generally ﬁtted to one side of the ship (see Figure 24.2 ) with the structure below substantially reinforced to carry the loadings.
Awide range of standard shipboard general-purpose cranes with SWLs from 5 to 60 tonnes are found on general cargo and reefer ships.
These cranes may be positioned on the ship’s center line, but this may require an extremely long jib when the ship’s beam is large and a reasonable outreach is desired.
Pairs of cranes at one end of the hatch or at opposite corners of the hatch and with an ability to work through 360  can provide a full range of load/discharge options for a ship.
The cranes are also easier to control, making for faster cargo handling.
Tailor-made heavy lift cranes of 400- to 800-tonne capacity have been supplied for offshore and heavy-lift ships.
In some cases the latter have been installed on one side of the hull in order to perform a tandem lift with a maximum capacity of 1600 tonnes.
masts are often ﬁtted, but many ships now have various forms of bipod mast, which are often more suitable for supporting derricks, although some types can restrict the view from the bridge.
Sampson posts are often ﬁtted at the ends of houses and may also be found at the other hatches.
Topping block Span Span lead Cargo purchase Slewing guy Cargo lead SINGLE SWINGING DERRICK (a) Heel block Standing guy (b) UNION PURCHASE RIG Outboard boom Standing guy Carg o runner Boom plumbing hatch Hatch (d) YO-YO RIGS (c) BUTTERFLY RIG Cargo runner Standing guy Hatch Standing guy Shackle Figure 24.2 520 TEU container feeder ship ﬁtted with two 40-tonne ram lufﬁng cranes.
Where shrouds and preventers are ﬁtted these must be allowed for, which makes the calculations somewhat more difﬁcult.
Shrouds are often dispensed with and preventers may only be rigged when heavy derricks are used.
Each mast or post has adequate scantlings so that they may remain unstayed.
The short lengths may be tapered and are of different plate thicknesses to allow for the greater stresses experienced at the base of the mast.
Where connections are made for ﬁttings such as the gooseneck and a masthead span swivel, doubling or welded reinforcing pads may be provided.
Cross-trees, mast tables, etc. may be fabricated from welded steel plates and sections.
Derrick booms are as a rule welded lengths of seamless tubular steel.
The middle length may have a greater diameter to allow for the bending moment, to which the boom is subject in addition to the axial thrust.
Many cargo ships have mast houses into which the masts are built, the house being suitably strengthened.
These houses need not be designed to support the mast, the structure being of light scantlings and the support provided by stiffening in the tweens.
Where the house is strengthened the masts or posts generally land on the upper deck, but where heavy derricks are installed the mast may then land on the upper tween deck.
Since the derricks and mast are as a rule midway between holds they land over the hold transverse bulkheads, which lend further support.
Stiffened plate webs at the ship’s center line in the tweens and heavier stiffeners on the transverse bulkhead in the hold then provide the additional strengthening below decks (see Figure 24.3 ).
Heavy insert plates are ﬁtted in way of the mast at the various decks.
Derrick rigs Various forms of derrick rig may be used aboard the cargo ship, the commonest use of the single derrick being as a ‘single swinging derrick’ (see Figure 24.4 a).
Figure 24.3 Stiffening in way of mast and heavy derrick.
derrick booms may be used in ‘union purchase’ ( Figure 24.4 b), the booms being ﬁxed in the overboard and inboard positions.
Cargo is lifted from the hatch and swung outboard by the operator controlling the winches for the cargo runner.
Swivel for derrick head span block Eye plate welded thro’ derrick Span load Welded lugs for slewing guys Span pull Resultant load on span block Mast Shrunk and welded tubular sections Cargo purchase Derrick boom Boom thrust Span load S.W.L. Pull in lead S.W.L. + Cargo purchase +
Half boom Safe working load Resultant on cargo head block Resultant load on heel block Pull in lead Pull to winch Gooseneck seat welded thro’ mast
Figure 24.4 Derrick rigs.
Where a weight exceeding the safe working load of the derricks is to be lifted, the ‘yo-yo’ rig is sometimes adopted ( Figure 24.4 d).
Patent derricks are generally of the single swinging type with some form of powered slewing.
The Hallen swinging derrick is shown diagrammatically in Figure 24.5 a.
Of particular note in the very heavy lifting range is the patent Stu¨lken derrick ( Figure 24.5 b) marketed by Blohm and Voss AG, which may have a safe working load of between 80 and 300 tonnes.
One advantage that this derrick has is its ability to serve two hatches, the boom swinging through an arc between the posts in the fore and aft directions.
Forces in derrick rigs The geometry of the derrick rig will to a large extent inﬂuence the loads carried by the rig components.
Those dimensions that have the greatest inﬂuence are the length of boom, the distance between the boom heel and the masthead span connection (height of suspension), and the angle at which the boom is topped.
Force diagrams are shown for the rig components of the single swinging derrick illustrated in Figure 24.6 .
For a safe working load of 15 tonnes or less the forces may be calculated with the derrick at angles of 30  and 70  to the horizontal unless the owner speciﬁes that the derrick is to be used at a lower angle (not less than 15  ).
At safe working loads greater
Limiting height Curve of limiting heights (runners at 120 ° at any point of curve)
Loads vary in runners at 120 ° included angle unless boom heads are level.
Tonnes Outboard runner load 1.8 Tonnes 2.1 Tonnes Inboard runner load Inboard boom Outboard boom + 120 ° 120 ° 90 ° 30 °
Note: Figure 24.5 Patent derricks.
Figure 24.6 Forces in single swinging derrick rig.
A single-sheave block has a safe working load that is half the resultant, and multi-sheave blocks have a safe working load that is the same as the resultant.
The other half of the boom weight is supported by the gooseneck ﬁtting.
This includes an allowance for the rope friction, i.e. the effort required to bend and unbend the rope around the pulley, as well as an allowance for journal friction.
These diagrams indicate the safe working load of the rig, the ‘limiting height’, the boom thrusts (which are greater with this rig), and the optimum guy leads.
The ‘limiting height’ is that height below which all positions of the lifted weight will result in an included angle between the outboard and inboard runners of less than 120  .
At 120  , if the boom heads are level the inboard and outboard runners will experience a force equivalent to the cargo weight (see Figure 24.7 ).
If these are at too narrow an angle to the boom, excessive tension in the guys will result; a good lead is therefore essential.
There is available a suitable preventer for this purpose; the use of old runners etc. as preventers should not be tolerated.
In union purchase rigs it is possible to obtain a condition where the load comes off the outboard span, and the boom may then close to the mast under load.
At the design stage the guy positions can be adjusted to avoid this happening.
Both light structures of a discontinuous nature, i.e. ﬁtted with expansion joints, and superstructures withheavier scantlings able to contribute to the strength of the main hull girder were introduced.
Present practice, where the length of the superstructure is appreciable and has its sides at the ship side, does not require the ﬁtting of expansion joints.
This was brought about by the lighter weight of the aluminum alloy structure.
Heavy-lift derricks are tested at an angle of not more than 45  to the horizontal and other derricks at an angle of not more than 30  to the horizontal.
Its safe working load in single purchase.
Its safe working load in double purchase, if it is designed for that purpose.
Its safe working load in union purchase, if it is designed for that purpose, the letter ‘U’ preceding the safe working load.
3–30 tonne S.W.L. wire luffing cranes mounted on 70,000 tonne deadweight bulk carrier Figure 24.7 Forces in cargo runners of union purchase rig.
For example, SWL 3/5 tonnes SWL (U) 2 tonnes and a certiﬁcate of test and examination is issued in an approved form.
Re-tests are required if the rig is substantially modiﬁed or a major part is damaged and repaired.
British Standards Institution, BS MA 47:1977, Code of Practice for Ships Cargo Blocks .
The vehicles are driven on and off using large doors and a series of ramps to access different deck levels.
Ro-ro vessels may be ﬁtted with stern doors of the hinge-down or hinge-up type, which if large are articulated.
Bow doors are either of the visor type or of the sidehinged type (‘barn door’ type).
All rights reserved.
and the inner door is omitted.
This ramp may extend forward of the speciﬁed limit for the collision bulkhead above a height of more than 2.3 m above the bulkhead deck, i.e. above the height of a conventional tween deck space.
Stern doors and bow visors can be mechanically raised and lowered with wire rope and purchase arrangements, but in general they and the side-hinged bow doors are hydraulically opened and closed (see Figure 25.1 ).
These weathertight doors are casketed and cleated.
Ramps Ro-ro ships ﬁtted with ramps usually have a stern ramp (see Figure 25.1 b), but some vessels ﬁtted with bow doors may also have a bow ramp that doubles as the inner weathertight door and is lowered onto a linkspan when the bow visor or side-hinged doors have been opened.
Ramps may also be ﬁtted internally to give access from deck to deck.
These can be hydraulically or mechanically tilted to serve more than one deck and can be ﬁxed in the horizontal position to serve as decks themselves (see Figure 25.2 ).
In some ships they can even be raised into the hatch space and serve as weathertight covers.
Hydraulic opening/ closing ram Hydraulic securing cleats (a) HYDRAULIC STERN DOOR (b) STERN RAMP Stern door Stern ramp up Stern ramp down Figure 25.1 Stern Ramps and Doors.
Stern ramps can be ﬁxed axial ramps, ﬁxed quarter ramps, slewing ramps, or semislewing quarter ramps (see Figure 25.3 ).
The axial stern ramp may also serve as the stern door and can be lowered or raised hydraulically or by wire rope arrangements.
The quarter ramp was designed for ro-ro ships using ports that are not provided with right-angled quays or link span connections.
Slewing ramps serve a similar purpose to the quarter ramp, but are more ﬂexible.
The slewing ramp moves around the stern on a curved guide rail, the movement being affected by the lifting and lowering wire purchases, which are led to hydraulic winches.
Instead of a loading platform on ships trading to ports with high tidal ranges a ramp onto which the quayside fork-lift truck drives may be ﬁtted.
the Car deck Stowed position Loading position (to car deck) Position at car deck level (cars would be on here) PLAN VIEW OF RAMP Vehicle ramp Down Car deck Figure 25.2 Internal Deck Access Ramps.
Quarter ramp (a) LARGE STERN RAMP TYPES Slewing ramp Semi-slewing ramp Plan Ramp stowed Ramp down (b) LARGE QUARTER RAMP Elevation Figure 25.3 Stern and Quarter Access Ramps.
newsprint rolls being transferred from the loading platform to the elevator platform, which travels to the preselected deck or hold level for unloading (see Figure 25.4 ).
Combined side door/hatch covers are ﬁtted in designs where the ship is low in the water relative to the height of quay in order to provide sufﬁcient head room for forklift truck operation (see Figure 25.4 ).
The unit load is raised from the quay to a point above the ship’s side, swung inboard through 180  on a rotating frame unit and lowered through the hatch to the hold or tween.
Deck hatch Figure 25.4 Side Doors and Elevators.
to Japan, and lowered for the return voyage when 3000 cars are carried.
The car deck is the most common form of portable deck and common in ro-ro ferries.
Either commercial vehicles can be loaded using the full height between decks or, with the portable deck in place, two levels of cars can be carried in the same space.
Hoistable decks are lowered from and stowed at the deckhead by hoist wires led through a hydraulic jigger winch.
On the decks of ro-ro ships where the direction of lashing is unpredictable and vehicles must transverse the ﬁtting, a cloverleaf deck socket in conjunction with an elephant’s foot type of end lashing is popular (see Figure 25.5 ).
Also, of course, when ofﬂoading the fore and aft container is more easily received by road or rail transport.
The cell guides are not to form an integral part of the ship’s structure, they are to be so designed that they do not carry the main hull stresses.
Where four container corners are adjacent the cell guides may be built into a composite pillar (see Figure 25.5 ).
Lloyd’s require that the cell guide not deviate from its intended line by more than 4 mm in the transverse direction and 5 mm in the longitudinal direction.
Figure 25.5 Container Guides and Lashing Points.
Deck sockets like the container corner ﬁtting contain the standard ISO hole into which the stackers ﬁt (see Figure 25.5 ).
RINA Conference on RO RO Safety, June 1996.
Code of Safe Practice for Cargo Stowage and Securing .
House DJ: Cargo Work for Maritime Operations , ed 7.
Knot JR: Lashing and Securing of Deck Cargoes , ed 3, London, 2002, The Nautical Institute.
Some useful websites www.tts-se.com For details of ramps, doors, lifts, car decks, side loading systems, etc.
It is easy to see the reason for this if the Aquitania , built in 1914 and having direct drive turbines with 21 double-ended scotch boilers, is compared with the Queen Elizabeth 2 .
Tween deck clearances are greater and public rooms extend through two or more decks, whilst enclosed promenade and atrium spaces are now common in these vessels.
Initially relatively small, these craft may now be more than 100 meters in length and carry upwards of 500 persons plus 100 cars/30 trucks or more.
The latter have a high proportion of their twin-hull buoyancy below the waterline (see Figure 3.7 ).
An updated version of this Code of Safety was adopted in December 2000.
All rights reserved.
One suction is from the main bilge line and the other from an independent power-driven pump.
Bilge suctions As the vessel is to be pumped out when listed it is necessary to ﬁt port and starboard suctions in other than very narrow spaces.
However, where a ship has a single hold that exceeds 33.5minlengthsuctionsarealsoarrangedintheforwardhalflengthofthehold.
Adequate drainage to the bilge is provided where a ceiling covers this space.
If, however, the tank top extends to the ship sides, bilge wells having a capacity of at least 0.17 m 3 may be arranged in thewings of the compartment.
The shaft tunnel of the ship is drained bymeans of awell located at the after end, and the bilge suction is taken from the main bilge line (see Figure 26.1 ).
The strum box is a perforated plate box welded to the mouth of the bilge line ( Figure 26.1 ), which prevents debris being taken up by the bilge pump suction.
Perforations in the strum box do not exceed 10 mm in diameter, and their total cross-sectional area is at least twice that required for the bore of the bilge pipe.
Strums are arranged at a reasonable height above the bottom of the bilge or drain well to allow a clear ﬂow of water and to permit easy cleaning.
In the machinery space and shaft tunnel the pipe from the bilges is led to the mud box, which is accessible for regular cleaning.
Each mud box contains a mesh to collect sludge and foreign objects entering the end of the pipe.
Where the passenger ship has a length in excess of 91.5 m it is a requirement that at least one of these pumps will always be serviceable in reasonable damage situations.
A submersible pump may be supplied with its source of power above the bulkhead deck.
No. 5 Tunnel hold Engine room No. 1 hold No. 2 hold No. 3 hold No. 4 hold BILGE STRUM Bilge pipe Side of superstructure SCUPPER ABOVE FREEBOARD DECK
Suction connections are led to each hold or compartment from the main bilge line.
Bilge mains in passenger ships are kept within 20% of the ship’s beam of the side shell, and any piping outside this region or in a duct keel is ﬁtted with a nonreturn valve.
Bilge and ballast piping may be of cast or wrought iron, steel, copper, or other approved materials.
Scuppers Scuppers are ﬁtted at the ship’s side to drain the decks.
Figure 26.1 shows a scupper ﬁtted above the freeboard deck.
Below the freeboard deck and within the intact superstructures and houses on the freeboard deck ﬁtted with weathertight doors, these scuppers may be led to the bilges.
It is a statutory requirement that a ﬁre main and deck wash system should be supplied.
This has hose outlets on the various decks, and is supplied by power-driven pumps in the machinery spaces.
Provision may be made for washing down the anchor chain from a connection to the ﬁre main.
Air and sounding pipes Air pipes are provided for all tanks to prevent air being trapped under pressure in the tank when it is ﬁlled, or a vacuum being created when it is emptied.
Each air pipe from a double-bottom tank, deep tanks that extend to the ship’s side, or any tank that may be run up from the sea, is led up above the bulkhead deck.
From oil fuel and cargo oil tanks, cofferdams, and all tanks that can be pumped up, the air pipes are led to an open deck, in a position where no danger will result from leaking oil or vapors.
Sounding pipes are provided to all tanks, and compartments not readily accessible and are located so that soundings are taken in the vicinity of the suctions, i.e. at the lowest point of the tank.
Each sounding pipe is made as straight as possible and is led above the bulkhead deck, except in some machinery spaces where this might not be practicable.
Underneath the sounding pipe a striking plate is provided where the sounding rod drops in the bilge well etc.
a substantial box within the line of the shell plate containing the sea inlet opening (see Figure 26.2 ).
This opening is to have rounded corners and be kept clear of the bilge strake if possible.
The sea inlet box should have the same thickness as the adjacent shell but is not to be less than 12.5 mm thick and need not exceed 25 mm.
Where smaller tankers carry a number of oil products at one time, which must be kept separate, the pumping system is more complex.
The piping system is of the ‘direct line’ type, three or four lines being provided, each with Anode Sea inlet box Sea inlet grids positioned so that bars are in fore and aft direction Closing valve Mud box Sluice valve Figure 26.2 Sea inlet.
suctions from a group of tanks (see Figure 26.3 ).
Each pump discharge is led up to the deck mains, which run forward to the transverse loading and discharging connections.
These permit a ﬂow of the oil to a common suction in the after tank space.
Suctions from the main cargo lines are located in the center tanks.
Such an arrangement is shown in Figure 26.3 , which also indicates the separate stripping system, and clean ballast lines.
One may be ﬁtted aft adjacent to the machinery space, a second amidships, and where a third pump room is provided this is forward.
On many older tankers the piping was often arranged on the ‘ring main’ system to provide ﬂexibility of pumping conditions (see Figure 26.4 ).
1 2 3 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Machinery Pump room CARGO PIPING WITH PARTIAL FULL FLOW IN LARGE CRUDE OIL TANKER Pump room Water ballast Water ballast Filling lines Deep tank 2 1 3 4 5 Stripping line Cargo line Ballast line Bulkhead valves Figure 26.4 Diagrammatic representation of ring main cargo piping arrangement.
Oil tankers of 20,000 tonnes deadweight or more should have a ﬁxed deck foam system and a ﬁxed inert gas system.
On an oil tanker, inert gas may be produced by one of two processes: 1. Ships with main or auxiliary boilers normally use the ﬂue gas, which contains typically only 2–4% by volume of oxygen.
An inert gas generating plant may then be used to produce gas by burning diesel or light fuel oil.
The gas is scrubbed and used in the same way as boiler ﬂue gas.
Gas freeing may then take place at the cargo tank deck level.
Cargo tank washing After discharge of cargoes, oil tanker cargo tanks can be cleaned by either hot or cold water, fresh or sea water, or by crude oil washing.
At this stage the builder should have sufﬁcient information to tender.
The design of the ship is not complete at this stage, rather for the major effort in resources it has only just started.
Stability Figure 1.1 Design spiral.
a M n oit a d
-I T L U M L
There may then be no need to water wash tanks for the removal of residues unless clean water ballast is to be carried in the tank.
All rights reserved.
A simple corrosion cell is formed by two different metals in an electrolyte solution (a galvanic cell), as illustrated in Figure 27.1 .
